Preparatory comments:

The following CDC report was obtained by Mrs. Betty Martini via a
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request.  Mr. Martini commented that
when you request this report the CDC only sends the summary.  When she
filed the FOIA she was first told that they couldn't find it.  When
she stated that she had already seen the report, they finally sent it
to her.

On 2-18-1998 I visited the CDC WEB site at:
<http://www.cdc.gov/search.htm>http://www.cdc.gov/search.htm and did a
search for "aspartame" with NO hits (out of almost 20 thousand
documents) so for the world the CDC has nothing "official" to say or
present concerning aspartame.

The aspartame industry has showcased this CDC "summary" (of their 146
page report) which covers only 231 of around 500 complaints on hand.
Over the years the FDA has received thousands of complaints (but not all
of them seem to be accounted for) and as of 1996 the FDA admitted to
something over 10,000 "official" complaints.  The FDA has stated that
aspartame is the most complained about substance in their history.  Dr.
Kessler has been credited with saying that fewer than 1 percent of
victims actually file a complaint.  This balloons those over 10,000
"formal" complaints to over a MILLION victims... who should have filed.

Most doctors and victims of aspartame poisoning don't have a clue to the
cause of those many painful and expensive problems.  What is not known
cannot be reported.  More to the point, the majority of aspartame caused
problems are usually misdiagnosed as arthritis, Fibromyalgia, MS, Lupus,
and/or a whole rage of other diseases.

During l996, prior to granting blanket approval to use aspartame in
everything, the FDA had to show a decrease in complaints.  Their l996
report of complaints actually mentions that they had to change their
bookkeeping system so as to enable them to purge hundreds of complaints
from their files.  (During Congressional Hearings it was even admitted
they had referred aspartame complaints to the AIDS Hotline).  Many
victims have complained to Mission Possible that when they called the
FDA to file a complaint they were told that the FDA no longer accepted
such complaints.

(WEBmasters note: Neither of my 1996 certified letters of complaint to FDA
 -and- DHHS were ever acknowledged or responded to).

The CDC report was done at a time when very there were relatively FEW
people using aspartame,  when it was only in a few hundred products and
from only a short period of time. It is estimated that over 9000
products now incorporate aspartame as a sweetening agent.  This CDC
report does NOT cover the majority of over 200 million users around the
world, many of whom have been using aspartame-laced products for over 17
years.  This means they could NOT foresee, nor report upon, the long-
term problems caused by constant micro-doses of methanol, formaldehyde,
and formic acid, along with a continual bombardment of aspartic acid,
phenylalanine, that converts to diketopiperazine (DKP, a tumor agent),
reduced levels of serotonin, and the many other changes that may take
place in a given victim.

The CDC and the FDA are under the Department of Health and Human
Services. The FDA ignored the Delaney amendment, ignored a "don't
approve" recommendation from its own Public Board of Inquiry, ignored a
thwarted attempt to indict Searle for fraud (the statute of limitations
expired after two key Department of Justice lawyers went to work for
Searle's law firm), ignored the Dr. Gross testimony and the Bressler
report, along with common sense and the FDA charter to protect the
public... in order to approve aspartame for limited use during July of
1981.  Since then the FDA has blocked all attempts at further testing.
To cap their achievement the CDC did a "once over lightly" evaluation of
very few short-term cases, and then appears to have whitewashed the
summary.

Aspartame was never and cannot be proven to be safe. It is not and
cannot be a diet aid, because the formaldehyde (from the breakdown of
the 10% methanol) gets stored in the fat cells.  The National Soft Drink
Association did a 30-page protest in the '80s that mentioned aspartame
was unstable, and that it depleted serotonin (a substance that gives one
that "full" feeling) which often induces a craving for carbohydrates.
If you want to get fat... aspartame is where its at.  The Atlanta
Journal Constitution reported 2/13/98 "Obesity called 'a national
epidemic'".

A fitting description is that "ASPARTAME is a Pandora's box of
chameleon-like toxins and tumor agents that have 92 FDA acknowledged
ways to ruin your life, DEATH being one of them!"

For FDA toxicologist Dr. Gross's sworn testimony to Senator Metzenbaum,
that proved the brain tumor issue, see:  http://www.dorway.com/gross.txt
(around 55kb)

For the complete text of the FDA's 76 page "Bressler" report  (less FDA
deleted information) that verifies the brain tumor findings of Dr.
Gross, and adds mammary, ovarian and uterine tumors to the list see:
http://www.dorway.com/bressler.txt  (around 162kb)

For a more IN-DEPTH review of this CDC report in an article  entitled
"Sweet Delusion - How Safe is Your Artificial Sweetener?" by Barbara
Alexander Mullarkey, see http://www.dorway.com/allcons.txt (60kb)

For a rundown of breakdown/conversion products of aspartame see:

http://www.dorway.com/92sympt.txt and for a copy of the standard Email
reply for those seeking additional information on aspartame see:

http://www.dorway.com/standard.txt which includes the complete diet coke
report, text for a very informative pamphlet that includes most of the
FDA's 92 acknowledged symptoms of aspartame poisoning, and many links
that serve as a good menu of URL's to visit.

--- The OFFICIAL CDC summary on the 146 page CDC report on aspartame:

Frederick L. Trowbridge' executive summary where he states,

************************  Executive summary  ************************
"Currently available information, based on data with limitations as
described in the report indicated a wide variety of complaints that are
generally of a mild nature. Although it may be that  certain individuals
have an unusual sensitivity to the product, these data do not provide
evidence for the existence of serious, widespread, adverse health
consequences to the use of aspartame."

****************************  CDC REPORT  ****************************
     (1986, based on fewer than 700 of over 10,000 current reports)

        The CDC report on aspartame complaints Introduction

     In February 1984, the food and Drug Administration (FDA) requested
the assistance of the Centers for disease Control (CDC) in evaluating
consumer complaints related to aspartame consumption. Up until that time
the FDA had received over 100 complaints of various symptoms believed by
the complainants to be related to their consumption of aspatame-
contaoning products.

Additional reports were known to be in the hands of G. D. Searle and
Company, the manufacturer of aspartame, and in the hands of scientists
concerned with the product's safety. Questions raised by some scientist
and the public concern that developed in response to adverse publicity
following the decision in July 1983 to permit aspartame's inclusion in
soft drinks led the FDA to collect for analysis the reports of adverse
reactions held by these other groups.

     The report that follows includes the analysis of approximately 600
consumer complaints reported originally to the FDA, to G. D. Searle and
Company, and to several other persons and private organizations. Over
200 of these complaints were analyzed in depth to assess their
likelihood of being related to aspartame consumption. IN most instances
the complaints were consumer initiated and were unassociated with
physician evaluation or systematic testing. Therefore, the conclusions
that can be drawn are limited regarding whether the conditions reported
are or are not directly related to the aspartame ingestion. This report
provides a description of the symptoms reported and the characteristics
of the persons reporting them.

     In addition, the report suggests a framework within which
additional studies, should they be deemed necessary, could be undertaken
to shed light on whether the reported symptoms were in fact due to
ingestion of products containing aspartame

Background

     Aspartame's use as a sweetener was originally approved by the FDA
in 1974. However, based on objections to the approval and on request for
a hearing to investigate certain alleged toxic effects of aspartame, the
FDA subsequently suspended the approval and conducted and extensive
audit of various toxicological studies. Following the audit, a public
board of inquiry consisting of scientists outside the FDA reviewed
testimony and evaluated the scientific issues raised in the objections.
Finally, in July 1981 the Commissioner of the Food and Drug
Administration reviewed the Board's conclusions and determined that, on
the basis of available data, aspartame consumption was safe within the
meaning of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. The major issues at
the time of this earlier review were that aspartame consumption might
cause brain damage ( such as mental retardation). endocrine dysfunction,
or tumors. There was little concern presented regarding possible acute
symptomatology. Further, from the clinical studies performed by the
sponsor prior to approval, there was little to suggest that acute
effects were likely to occur.

     In October 1981 the FDA reinstated its original approval for the
use of aspartame as a table-top sweetener and ins certain other
products. In July of 1983 the approval was amended to permit the
additional use of aspartame as a sweetener in carbonated beverages.
Subsequent to the amended approval, there was an increase in the number
of consumer complaints received. Much of the increase was concurrent
with the increase in publicity about the FDA decision to permit
Aspartame's use in Carbonated Beverages the increase stemming from
various persons and agencies concerned

with the safety of aspartame. Although aspartame is presently permitted
in the United Kingdom and Canada, apparently there have been few
reported complaints there.

     Extensive scientific literature exists that reviews the
physiological, biological and toxicological effects of phenylalanine,
aspartic acid, and methanol. Aspartame is broken down in the body to
amino acids ( phenylalanine and aspartic acid) and methanol. During
storage, varying amounts of the degradation product, a diketopiperazine
(DKP) are formed. The effects of these breakdown products have remained
a concern of some scientists.

     The sponsor, G. D. Searle and Company, conducted a series of animal
and clinical test including studies specifically designed to assess the
safety of the DKP breakdown product. A number of studies that have been
reported examine the biological and biochemical effects of aspartmae in
humans. Relatively few of these studies directed specifically at
examining side effects or associated symptoms among people given large
or even routine amounts in controlled situations.

Interpretation of Findings

     The interpretation of findings here presented is based on the
results of the investigation found in later sections of this document.

     This investigation into the consumer complaints received by the FDA
and other organizations and individuals regarding symptoms considered by
the complainants to have been caused by ingestion of aspartame-
containing products had three major purposes. The first was to provide a
basic descriptive analyses of the types of symptoms reported and the
characteristics of the population reporting them., The second was to
attempt to determine whether specific individual symptoms or
constellations of symptoms were reported with sufficient consistency to
suggest which, if any, of the reports has a likelihood of truly being
caused by ingestion of aspartame-containing predictors. The third major
purpose was to indicate areas where further studies, should they seem
necessary, would be most likely to shed light on whether or not
aspartame causes the symptoms reported.

     It was not anticipated that this investigation alone could
definitively establish whether ingestion of aspartame-containing
products did or did not cause the symptoms reported. Definitive analysis
and conclusions relative to causation are typically beyond the scope of
the information that can be collected by passive surveillance systems
such as those were consumers are encouraged to report complaints and
concerns regarding products they have used. Data from passive
surveillance systems can, however, indicate the possibility of an
association. In their discussion we will describe some of the strengths
and limitations of such systems and the data they area able to provide,
and how the limitations of such systems affect the conclusions that can
be drawn from investigations such as the present study. Taking these
limitations into account we will indicate which conclusions are most
strongly suggested by the data together with potential alternative
conclusions.

Passive surveillance systems

     Passive surveillance implies that cases are not actively solicited
by the agency or organization concerned, but rather are initiated on the
part of the consumer or complainant. The major strengths of such a
passive surveillance system are, in addition to conserving resources,
that there is no presupposition that certain foodstuffs or additives are
more likely that others to cause difficulties, nor that certain
conditions are more likely to be caused by a given product. Conversely,
in an active system, unanticipated problems are less likely to be
detected that ideally would be the case, because investigations are
targeted toward specific products, agents, or conditions.

     There are several underlying assumptions with regard to passive
systems. One is that serious problems have a higher likelihood of being
reported than do mild ones, even if the serious ones occur less
commonly. Also it is expected that symptoms and conditions that occur
soon after use of the product are more apt to be thought by the consumer
to be caused by the use of the product and hence, reported. A third
underlying assumption is that complaints regarding symptoms or
conditions that occur commonly in the population are more likely to
occur as a chance temporal association with consumption of the product
that are more rare and serious symptoms. It follows then that these
passive surveillance systems are thought to be more sensitive in their
ability to detect rare and serious conditions occurring shortly after
the use of a product than common symptoms or symptoms occurring at some
distant time from the use.

     Finally it is well accepted that such systems cannot, by
themselves, prove that a given symptom or condition is caused by the use
of the product, nor can they exonerate product use as a cause. Rather,
their purpose is to permit any unusual clustering of reports to be
detected. The descriptive analysis of the case reports can also be used
to define whether further investigations my be needed and to identify
those groups and conditions that, on further study, would be most likely
to yield substantial new insights on the issue. The attendant media
publicity regarding the decision to permit the use of aspartame in
carbonated beverages and the extensive public attention given to the
various hearings concerning aspartame's safety add and additional
difficulty to this particular investigation.  Publicity regarding
aspartame can be expected to increase the number of reports of both
serious and common symptoms.  It is likely that many of the latter will
be temporally associated with aspartame ingestion by chance alone. Thus,
while the publicity may have facilitated case finding by encouraging
individuals with potentially valid complaints to report, it probably
also contributed to an overall dilution of these complaints with a
number of less specific and diffuse reports.  This makes more difficult
the task of identifying those individual symptoms or constellations of
symptoms that may be likely to be related to the ingestion of products
containing aspartame.

General Finding

Demographically, the most striking finding was the high prevalence of
complainants who were white women, 20 - 60 years of age.  Approximately
60 percent of all complainants fit this category.  (The symptoms of the
female complainants were distributed throughout all major symptom
categories.) The information available does not permit us to determine
whether the over-representation of women among the complainants reflects
1) the possibility that women in this age group are more likely to use
products containing aspartame or more likely to use them more
frequently, thus increasing the exposure of this sub population; 2) a
greater tendency to follow through and report despite equal
susceptibility; or 3) a greater susceptibility to side effects from
aspartame use.  However, since it seems possible that women may be more
likely to be users of low-calorie products than men, it may at least
partially account for the fact that there are substantially more women
reporting side effects than men.  Similarly the other associations by
race and age also may reflect differences in use pattern more than they
do differences in susceptibility.  The inherent characteristics of
passive reporting systems with self-selected complainants make the
definition of group-specific deference's difficult.

some differences in subgroup reporting rates are to be expected; large
differences, however, could be used to focus later investigations.

     Though information was obtained with regard to the specific
aspartame-containing products that were associated with symptoms, it was
not possible to determine if any individual product was more likely to
be reported than others.  There is large variety of aspartame-containing
products, and no information was available to us regarding patterns of
use, frequency of use, amount purchased, etc.  In addition, the
publicity surrounding the recent inclusion of aspartame in carbonated
beverages may have affected public perception as to which type of
product(s) were more likely to be of concern, an effect that we could
neither assess nor control for the analysis.  The inability of this type
of study to implicate specific products would not seem to present a
serious problem in this case. There has been relatively little concern
directed at specific products; most of the concerns have focused on
aspartame itself, regardless of the product used.

Criteria for Assessing Possible Adverse Reactions

     Because we were unable to identify published criteria for
determining when given symptoms (as distinct from pathological entities)
are caused by ingestion of foodstuffs or additives, it seemed reasonable
to determine if the type of approach used to assess adverse reactions to
medications could be adapted for use concerning aspartame.  Often with
medications, relatively uncommon adverse effects are recognized only
after the product is approved for public use.

     In pharmacotherapy, therapeutic claims are customarily verified by
using double-blind, randomized clinical trials (RCTs) as the research
standard. In these studies patients of equal clinical susceptibility to
either

recovery or adverse events are randomly selected to be given a
medication in appropriate dosage or a control "placebo" treatment, and
outcomes are carefully monitored.  In order to guard against inadvertent
bias on the part of either the investigator or the patient, neither can
be aware of whether the patient will be given the therapeutic agent
under consideration or the control therapy.  These safeguards are to
prevent both the patient and the investigator from inadvertently over
interpreting possible improvements due to one therapy versus another.
The standard of the double-blind randomized clinical trial has now been
well accepted in the field of pharmacotherapy and is required prior to
licensure of new drugs despite the fact that such trials are often
expensive and may require elaborate strategies to insure that both the
patient and the investigator remain unaware of which therapy the patient
i actually receiving.

     This standard, however, is rarely able to be adhered to for the
evaluation of adverse reactions from medications.  Rather, publication
of case reports and the accumulation of such reports remain an important
means for identifying such reactions.  Evaluation of symptoms thought to
be related to the ingestion of certain foods is quite similar
conceptually to the evaluation of symptoms thought to be related to
exposure to medications. However, key differences remain.  Certainly for
prescription medications, the physician is the most common source of the
report.  Furthermore, in the case of prescription medications, the
report can more easily be placed in the context of other illnesses that
the patient may have and other exposures potentially able to cause
similar symptoms.  For food additives, on he other hand, the source of
the report is usually the persons who experienced the symptoms.
Further, they mat not have the detailed knowledge regarding their
illnesses and exposures that would permit them to evaluate the possible
existence of alternative explanations.

     Nevertheless, because of this conceptual similarity and the
similarity in the process by which scientific knowledge is developed, we
examined the consumer complaints received regarding possible effects of
aspartame use according to the principles outlined by Kramer and
Hutchinson.1,2  In their attempt to develop standards to improve the
scientific precision in the diagnosis of adverse drug reactions, they
identified six issues that need to be evaluated to determine whether a
given clinical manifestation is likely to be caused by the drug in
question.  Although obviously referring to information available to
physicians caring for patients, these issues have clear relevance for
the evaluation of the reports concerning aspartame ingestion.

     The six issues they identified are presented below, modified for
assessment of reactions to food additives.

     (1) Previous general experience with the additive:  Clinical
manifestations widely accepted as being due to the suspected additive
are weighted more heavily than those previously unknown.  Unfortunately,
there have been few studies that were directed specifically at examining
side effects or symptoms among aspartame users.  In one small double-
blind randomized clinical trial of aspartame use in a weight loss
program, the authors reported no difference in prevalence of symptoms
among those given aspartame and those given placebo.  Indeed, headaches
and abdominal cramps, two of the more frequently reported symptoms,
were, if anything, slightly more common among the placebo users.
However, in another trial conducted in pre-marketing testing, the
aspartame group reported more complaints than did the placebo group.
Otherwise, too little is known to permit us to consider one group of
symptoms more heavily than others.

     (2) Alternative etiologic candidates as possible causes of the
clinical manifestation reported:  High among these candidates are
possible medications that the complainant may be taking and/or other
illnesses or conditions that may cause the symptoms themselves.  This
information is often available to physicians assessing possible adverse
reactions to medications, but it is likely to be only incompletely
available from the complainants themselves, therefore, we were
essentially unable to evaluate adequately the likelihood of alternative
causes for the symptoms reported. We did exclude patients who indicated
that, upon consultation, their physician believed that other factors
were the cause or that aspartame was not the cause (Group D
complainants).  The remainder of the reports were included in the
analysis because of concern that complaints could be inappropriately
dismissed with only the historical information available. Additionally,
the requirement that Group A complainants must have been re challenged
with different aspartame-containing products was instituted to
distinguish symptoms potentially caused by ingredients other than
aspartame in specific products from symptoms potentially caused by the
aspartame in those products.

     (3) The timing of the manifestation:  Again, in regard to
medications, records are available as to when exposure began.  Further,
persons under a physician's care are more likely to take notice of the
presence of new symptoms than are persons consuming a food additive as
part of their daily routine.  Thus, in many of the reports relating to
aspartame consumption, particularly for diffuse symptoms, the details
regarding initiation of consumption and initiation of symptoms are
unclear.  However, most of the reported symptoms occurred within a
relatively short interval from last consumption of aspartame-containing
product(s), and thus the reported time frames are consistent with the
possibility that they are caused by ingestion of aspartame-containing
products.  A few complainants did report multiple discrete episodes,
giving clear, precise histories of the temporal relations.

     (4) Evidence of overdose or excess consumption:  Few of the
complainants gave histories of unusually high consumption.  Some did
describe the appearance of their symptoms as occurring after consuming
more than their usual amounts and not occurring when they consumed
smaller amounts.  A related issue is that of inappropriate use.
Aspartame is not

meant to be used in cooking or baking.  Since few of the complainants
indicated that they did this, inappropriate use does not appear to be a
likely source for the majority of the complaints.

     (5 and 6) Effects of cessation and re challenge:  This is the most
important criterion used in this report:  the observation of whether the
clinical manifestations abate after cessation of use of the food
additive and whether they recur upon reuse.  A substantial amount of
effort was spent on the part of the field investigators in assessing
whether symptoms recurred on re challenge with the same or other
aspartame-containing products.  It was felt that persons who experienced
recurrences upon reuse after a distinct symptom-free period had a higher
likelihood of having their symptoms actually being due to ingestion of
aspartame.  While, in general, we feel this to be true, there are
substantial limitations in applying this criterion.  People who
experience symptoms after first use might be primed to experience them
on repeated uses.  Avoiding the bias engendered by such priming is one
of the chief reasons for the use of the double-blind methods in clinical
trials.

     Thus, because of data limitations intrinsic to the use of personal
reports of symptoms without independent evaluation, many of the
recommend criteria for assessing whether a particular clinical
manifestation is attributable to a drug or food additive could not be
fully utilized.  This is especially so with regard to the criteria of
previous experience with reactions and alternative etiologic candidates
for the symptoms reported. For many of the reports, the timing was
within acceptable limits for plausibility so that few cases could be
excluded on this basis.  In only a few instances was evidence available
to suggest misuse or overuse of aspartame-containing products.  thus,
only the issue of challenge and re challenge was able to be reasonably
and thoroughly assessed.  One risk with this approach, however, is that
if complainants believe that particularly serious or unpleasant clinical
manifestations were due to aspartame consumption, they would be highly
unlikely to use it again.

Possible Future Investigations

     The number of instances of persons challenging themselves several
times with aspartame-containing products and reporting symptoms with
each re challenge suggests that some individuals may be sensitive.  The
only way to clearly determine this is through focused clinical studies.
Because of the numbers of reports, the subtlety and potential
seriousness of some of the manifestations, the concerns of some
scientists, and the possibility that one complainant has had his
symptoms of hyperactivity verified on independent exam, it would seem
that the highest priority for any future investigations might be in the
neurological/behavioral area, focusing on such symptoms as headaches,
mood alterations, and behavior changes.

Methods

     Initial review of the consumer complaint reports received by the
FDA indicated that important details of complainant characteristics,
symptoms, and recurrence of symptoms in the same individual were
unavailable for many of the reports.  Therefore, a more detailed,
standardized questionnaire was developed to enable the FDA field staff
to interview all complainants in a focused and standardized fashion.
Interviews were conducted either in person or by telephone.  If the
complainant had visited a physician, the investigator also interviewed
the physician and requested a copy of the medical records.
Simultaneously with these efforts, the FDA contacted G. D. Searle and
Company as well as others known to have received complaints regarding
possible adverse reactions to aspartame so that they could include these
reports in the investigation.

     When the field staff completed the interviews, the questionnaires
were sent to the FDA main office in Washington where they were logged in
and given an identifying number.  The forms were reviewed by the FDA
staff for completeness, clarity, and legibility; copies were then sent
to the CDC for further review, coding, and computerization.

Reports Analyzed

     Six hundred forty-five initial contacts are included in this
report.

These included all complaints received by the FDA before April 16, 1984;
those complaints received by G. D. Searle and Company until February 24,
1984; and the complaints received by private scientists (principally
Woodrow C. Monte, Director, Food Science and Nutrition Laboratory,
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona).  A number of the reports from
this last group were received later in the investigation; some were
received after March 1.

     The field investigators contacted each complainant and, where
applicable, interviewed any additional family members who reported
adverse effects.  In addition, if the complainant had received medical
care, field investigators interviewed the attending physician, and
medical records were sent to CDC with the complainant's questionnaire.
Complainants who refused to be interviewed or were unable to be
contacted were excluded from analysis.

Also, complaints that were withdrawn because the complainant no longer
believed the symptoms were due to aspartame were not analyzed as well as
complaints that were determined not to be associated with actual
aspartame use (e.g. letter of inquiry, etc.).

Screening Definitions

     For the purposes of this study, a case was defined as any report of
symptoms that the complainant associated with aspartame use.  All cases
meeting this definition were tabulated regarding basic demographic
information, major symptoms, state of residence, and agency or person
that received their original complaint.  Cases involving symptoms that
were reported very infrequently or for which no biologically plausible
mechanism could be postulated were not analyzed further (Table 5-8).
The remaining case reports were classified into the most frequently
occurring symptom categories: neurological/behavior, gastrointestinal,
allergic, and menstrual.

     Many persons reported symptoms from more than one category; in
these cases the symptoms were analyzed separately by each category.
Thus, the sum of the cases from the various sections in the report will
equal more than the number of persons registering complaints.  if the
symptoms from

one category were clearly secondary to another (for example, the nausea
associated with migraine-type headache) symptoms were analyzed in the
primary category only.  In a few cases, the complainant reported
consuming a product containing aspartame prior to the release of the
product on the market.  Because some interviews were conducted several
months after the episodes occurred and because of the problems inherent
in asking consumers to recall distant dates accurately, we did not
attempt to screen and reject these cases but included them in the
analysis, listing the date as unknown if a conflict was noted.

Detailed Analysis

     We reviewed the first 231 interviewed cases that were received and
fully coded at CDC by June 15.  One CDC investigator coded each case
according to a system that included the time frame for the occurrence of
symptoms and symptom complex.  A second investigator then recorded each
case.  We compared results, discussed discrepancies, and made a joint
decision as to the classification of each.  By this process 199 cases
were classified as containing reports of symptoms from four symptom
categories: Neurological/behavioral, gastrointestinal, allergic, and
menstrual.


     Special attention was paid to the temporal association between
aspartame ingestion and onset of symptoms.  The operating hypothesis was
that symptoms associated with aspartame ingestion would be more likely
to show a consistent temporal pattern relative to the time of the
ingestion of the products containing aspartame.  The following time
frames were defined:

     Latency Interval:  Time from the most recent ingestion to onset of
symptoms. Duration of Symptoms:  The time over which symptoms occurred
after a single discrete ingestion.  Duration of symptoms was examined
when the complainant did not repeat ingestion during the symptomatic
period.  In situations where symptoms could not be associated with a
single discrete ingestion, the duration of the episode was recorded as
unknown.

     Symptom-free Interval:  The time from date of first regular
ingestion of the implicated product(s) containing aspartame to date of
symptom onset.

This refers to a symptom-free period when the complainant used
aspartame-containing product(s).  In some cases this time period is
necessarily the same as the latency interval.  For menstrual complaints,
date of first symptoms was calculated as actual or expected date of
menstrual period.

     Time from Last Ingestion to the Cessation of Symptoms:  Time from
last reported ingestion of implicated aspartame-containing product(s) to
the complete cessation of symptoms.  For menstrual complaints, the date
of cessation of symptoms was calculated from the date of the first
normal period following menstrual symptoms.

     These four time periods were chosen because many of the
complainants could not identify a discrete ingestion of the product(s)
containing aspartame that was associated with a well delineated, acute
symptom episode.  For example, many of the reports were of chronic
symptoms associated with continuous ingestion's.  it was for this type
of complaint that the last two time periods were primarily intended.


     To help detect any more consistent associations, we then defined a
series of screening criteria to select those likely to be most fruitful
for further analysis.  To accomplish this, we classified cases according
to a scale based on elements of the history characterizing the relative
likelihood that reported symptoms were due to ingestion of product(s)
containing aspartame.  The screening classification scale was as
follows:

     Group A:  Symptoms recurred each time the complainant consumed more
than one product containing aspartame.  Placement into Group A required
that there be a symptom-free period in which no aspartame-containing
products were consumed, followed by another period of symptoms
associated with a different aspartame-containing product (see note
following Group B).

     Group B:  Symptoms recurred each time the complainant consumed the
same product containing aspartame.  As in Group A, there must have been
a totally symptom-free period between ingestion's (see note following).

     Note:  Cases in which the complainant volunteered that the symptoms
did not recur with the ingestion of small quantities of products
containing aspartame but did recur with larger quantities were
categorized as Group A or Group B depending on whether the recurrence
was with different or with the same products containing aspartame.

     Group C:  symptoms were associated with the ingestion of products
containing aspartame, but the complainants did not consume the products
again.

     Group D:  Symptoms did not recur every time the complainant
consumed a product containing aspartame.  Also placed in this Group were
complainants who consulted physicians who stated that the symptoms were
unlikely to be due to aspartame.  In order not to obscure the analysis
of temporal data with data from cases felt to be unlikely to be related
to aspartame ingestion, Group D cases were not analyzed regarding the
temporal period between the previously reported symptoms and ingestion.

     Throughout this report, we will use "re challenge" to mean second
or subsequent ingestion of a product or products containing aspartame
after a symptom-free interval.

OVERVIEW RESULTS

Completion Rates

     After soliciting reports from G. D.. Searle and Company and from
Woodrow C. Monte, the FDA initiated--beginning on February 24, 1984--
the intensive follow-up of consumer complaints. The reports received
from Searle and Dr. Monte were combined with reports received from  the
FDA through April 16, 1984, to make a total of 645 consumer complaints .
These complaints were designated for follow up by the FDA field
investigators. Of the initial 645 consumer contacts, 31 complainants
withdrew their complaint and 22 were actually other types of contacts
such as inquiries not associated with symptoms. Of the remaining 592
complaints, 42 were not followed up, primarily because on inability to
locate the complainant; 33 of the complainants refused further
interview. Thus a total of 517 completed questionnaires (87 percent of
the 592 complaints) were available for review.

     Questionnaires received at CDC were coded for intensive computer
analysis.

The remaining 286 questionnaires received later at CDC were assessed for
comparability with the first 231. The results of this comparative
analysis were found in Appendix I.

     The following data are based on the first 231 cases until otherwise
noted.

Demographic

     Overall, the complainants were predominantly female (75 percent)
and white (94 percent) (Table 5-1 and 5-2). The majority of complainants
(77 percent) were aged 21-60 years (Table 5-3). There were 17 reports on
children below the age of 16, 10 of whom were male. The youngest age
reported was 4 months, while the oldest was 77 years. Overall, the
complainants in this study population were approximately one and one-
half times more likely to be woman, and were two and one-half times more
likely to be woman between the ages of 20 and 59 than would be expected
from the 1980 census population estimates.

     The reports came form all sections of the country, with the
greatest number of reports coming generally from the more populous
states such as New York and California (Table 5-4).

     The 231 consumer complaints that were analyzed were originally
submitted to a variety of agencies and individuals. the FDA received 124
of the reports; G. D. Searle and Company received 91 reports. Dr.
Woodrow Monte forwarded 13 consumer complaints that had been originally
submitted to him.

The remaining three reports came first to Mr. James C. Turner,
Counselor, Community Nutrition Institute, Washington, DC. (Table 5-5).

     The number and variety of reported symptoms was large, with 63
percent of the complainants reporting multiple symptoms (Table 5-6) and
15 percent of the complainants reporting symptoms from more than one
symptom category (Table 5-7).

     Thirty-two cases with complaints that ere reported very
infrequently of for which there was no biologic plausibility were
excluded from further analysis beyond the tabulation of demographic
characteristics. Symptoms reported by these complainants are presented
in Table 7-8. Subsequent analysis are based only on the 199 fully
reviewed cases.

     Table 5-9 shows the distribution of cases by screening
classification.

Overall, 13 percent of all cases were classified as belonging to Group
A. As defined earlier in the report, these cases in which re challenges
with different aspartame-containing products were associated with repeat
onset of symptoms. Some 15 percent of cases were classified into Group
B--symptoms reported or recur on re challenge to the same product--while
the largest proportion of symptoms, 41 percent , were classified in to
Group C, in which no history of a re challenge was available. Thirty-two
percent of the cases fell into the D category, cases in which the
physician stated that the symptoms probably has a different etiology, or
cases in which the complainant had subsequently consumed aspartame
without recurrence of symptoms.

     Symptoms were reported to occur in associated with all major
aspartmae-containing products on the market at the time of the report
(Table 5-10).

The most frequent product type named was the table-top sweetener Equal.
(38 percent of implicated products), but this was followed by soft
drinks sweetened with aspartmae (26 percent of the implicated products).

     The first months that symptoms were reported to have occurred was
July 1982. There were relatively few symptoms reported, however, until
the summer of 1983. this was followed by another peak if reported
symptoms in the winter of 1984 (Table 5-11).

     Overall, 19 percent of complainants reported that they had not seen
a physician for any medical problems in the past two years. Of the
remaining 81 percent, the most frequent preexisting medical complaints
were allergies, hypertension, and diabetes. There were no complaints
filed by individuals with a personal or family history of
phenylketonuria. Use of medications (including over-the-counter drugs)
were reporting by 72 percent of the complainants, with
antihypertensives, vitamins, and analgesics being reported most
frequently.

OVERVIEW TABLES: CASES REVIEWED BY CDC

Table 5-1
Sex Distribution of Cases Selected for Review

Sex               Percent     Number

Male               25          58
Female             75          173

TOTAL             100          231

Table 5-2
Race Distribution of Cases Selected for Review

Race               Percent     Number

White               94          218
All other            3            6
Unknown              3            7

TOTAL              100          231

Table 5-3
Age Distribution of Cases Selected for Review

Age (years)     Percent     Number

0-10               5          12
11-20              4          10
21-30             18          42
31-40             26          60
41-50             20          46
51-60             13          31
61+               11          25
Unknown            2           5

TOTAL             99         231

Table 5-4
Distribution of Cases Selected for Review By State of Residence

State          Percent     Number
NY               15          34
CA               11          25
PA               6          14
MI               6          13
NJ               5          12
OH               5          12
IL               5          11
MD               4          10
FL               3          7
MA               3          7
NC               3          7
TX               3          7
VA               3          7
WI               3          7
IN               3          6
MS               3          6
AZ               2          5
CT               2          5
KS               2          5
CO               2          4
KY               1          3
OK               1          3
AL               1          2
MN               1          2
NH               1          2
DC               <1         1
GA               <1         1
LA               <1         1
MT               <1         1
NE               <1         1
RI               <1         1
SC               <1         1
TN               <1         1
WA               <1         1
WV               <1         1
Unknown          2          5


TOTAL                     231

Table 5-5
Distribution of Cases Selected for Review By Agency/Individual Received Report

                              Percent       Number

Food and Drug Administration      54          124
G. D. Searle and Company          39           91
Woodrow C. Monte                   6           13
James C. Turner                    1            3

TOTAL                            100          231

Table 5-6
Distribution by number of Symptoms

Number of Symptoms   Percent     Number

     1               37          85
     2               26          61
     3               18          42
     4                8          19
     5                7          16
     6 and >          3           8


     TOTAL          99          231

Table 5-7
Distribution of Cases Reviewed in Depth* By Major Symptom Categories

Symptom Category                              Percent     Number

Neurological/Behavioral Only                    51          101
Neurological/Behavioral + Gastrointestinal       8           16
Neurological/Behavioral + Allergic               4            7
Neurological/Behavioral + Menstrual              3            5
Gastrointestinal Only                           16           32
Gastrointestinal + Allergic                      1            2
Allergic only                                   16           31
Menstrual Only                                   3            5

TOTAL                                          101          199

*Excludes 32 cases with miscellaneous symptoms (Table 5-8).

Table 5-8
Frequency Distribution of Miscellaneous Symptoms Accepted for Demographic
Review Only

Complaint                          Number
Elevated Blood glucose               5
Palpitations                         3
Shortness of breath                  1
Hyperventilation                     1
Chest pain                           1
Backache/pain                        2
Arm pain                             1
Chills/sweating                      3
Cold symptoms                        1
Cough                                1
Skin blemish                         1
Swollen hands/fingers                2
Swollen joints (in legs and groin)   1
Flushing of face                     1
Burning tongue                       1
"Hard to swallow"                    1
Constant/severe hunger               1
Diminished sense of taste            1
Stiff jaws                           1
Ears "clogged"                       1
Cold fingertips                      1
"Cerebrospinal fluid from nose"      1
Retinal bleeding                     1
Melanoma                             1
Abnormal cells (Pap test)            1
Increased/frequency urination        3
Burning sensation during urination   2
Urinary tract infection              1
Unable to urinate                    1

TOTAL COMPLAINTS                    42
TOTAL COMPLAINANTS                  32

Table 5-9
Distribution of Cases by Screening Classification* Cases Reviewed in Depth
Only **

Screening
Classification       Percent     Number

Group A               13          26
Group B               15          29

Group C               41          81
Group D               32          63

TOTAL                101         199

*Screening Classifications:
Group A: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with more than one
aspartame-containing product.

Group B: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with same aspartame-containing
product.

Group C: Symptoms occurred associated with aspartmae-containing product,
but there was no re challenge.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

     (For complete definitions, see pages 17-18.) **Excludes 32 cases with
miscellaneous symptoms (Table 5-8).

Table 5-10
Distribution of Cases Reviewed in Depth by Aspartame-Containing Product
Implicated by Complainant*

Product               Percent     Number

Table-top Sweetener     38          105
Diet Soft Drink         26           72
Kool Aid                14           39
Iced Teas                6           17
Hot Chocolate            5           15
Lemonades                4           12
Puddings/Gelatins        3            7
Punch Mix                3            7
Other                    1            2
Unknown                  0            1

TOTAL                  100          277**

*Excludes 32 cases with miscellaneous symptoms (Table 5-8).
** Some complainants reported use of more than one product.

Table 5-11
Distribution of Cases Selected for Review by Date of Symptom Onset

                          Percent        Number
1982

July/August                  3             7
September/October            1             3

November/December            3             7

1983
January/February             6            14
March/April                  6            14
May/June                     9            20
July/August                 23            53
September/October           15            35
November/December           10            22

1984
January/February            16            36
March/April                  3             9

Unable to identify month     4            11*

TOTAL                       99           231

*includes on complaint in which the complainant was unsure of date of onset
and estimate June 1981, at which time aspartame was no on market.

NEUROLOGICAL/BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS: RESULTS

Demographic Characteristics

     The demographic characteristics of the 129 cases reporting
neurological/behavioral symptoms alone or in combination with other symptom
categories are similar to the demographic characteristics of all cases
combined. Over three-quarters (77 percent) are 21-60 years of age. The
majority are white (98 percent) and female (72 percent) (Table 6-1). The
demographic characteristics of Group A-C, on whom the following analysis
focuses, are similar to the demographic characteristics of the overall
group of complaints with neurological/behavioral symptoms.

Classification

     Of the 129 cases with neurological/behavioral symptoms, 15 percent
(19) met the criteria for Group A, 12 percent (15) for Group B, 44 percent
(57) for Group C, and 29 percent (38) for Group D (Table 6-2). Only Groups
A, B, and C will be discussed in the following analysis in order to obscure

the analysis with data from cases felt to be unlikely to be related to
aspartame ingestion.
Description of Symptoms

     As can be seen in Table 6-3, a large number and variety of
neurological/behavioral symptoms were reported. The most frequently
reported single symptom was headache (22 percent). Mood alterations,
which included complaints of anxiety, agitation, irritability, or
depression, were reported by 21 percent of the complainants. Insomnia
(11 percent), dizziness (10 percent) and fatigue (10 percent) were the
next most frequently reported symptoms. There were five cases of
seizure-type activity (3-percent) reported to be associated with
aspartame ingestion. (These are reviewed in further detail elsewhere--
see pages 68-76). Many other types of neurological/behavioral symptoms
were reported and are enumerated in Table 6-3. Temporal Associated
between Symptoms and Aspartame Products

     Symptom-free interval: Time from the first regular of implicated
aspartame product(s) to neurological/behavioral symptom(s). Data on the
symptom-free intervals of the most frequent neurological/behavioral
symptom categories are presented in Tables 6-4 and 6-5. Information on
hyperactivity is also included.

     In general, cases with more specific, discrete symptoms such as
headaches or dizziness tended to have shorter symptom-free intervals
that those cases with more diffuse symptoms such as mood alterations of
fatigue. For example, over half (59 percent) of the complainants
reporting headaches reported that the headaches began less than a week
after start of regular consumption of aspartame-containing product(s),
and 41 percent reported that the headaches began on the same day use as
first use. On the other hand, over half (54 percent) of the complainants
reporting mood alterations stated that the symptoms did not begin until
they had been using the product(s) for at least 1 week.

     Latency interval: Time from most recent ingestion of implicated
product to symptom onset. The latency intervals for headache, dizziness
and hyperactivity and included in Table 6-6. This information is not
presented for insomnia, mood alterations or fatigue since it was quite
often not possible for complications with these symptoms to provide this
information.

     The latency intervals for headache, dizziness, and hyperactivity
symptoms tend to be fairly short in duration, with the majority being
less than 3 hours. This information, however, was often not available
even for these three symptoms. For example, in 37 percent of the reports
of headaches and 53 percent of the reports of dizziness, the complainant
could not provide this information.


     Duration: Time over which symptom episode occurred. Duration was
calculated only if a discrete ingestion could be identified (Table 6-7).

     The majority of the reported episodes of headaches, for which this
information was available, lasted 12 hours or less. Episodes of
dizziness were generally of shot duration also, with the majority of
cases of known duration lasting less than 6 hours. Once again, this
information was not available for a large number of the cases.

     Post-ingestion symptomatic interval: Time from final ingestion of
implicated product(s) to complete cessation of neurological/behavioral
symptom(s) (Table 6-8).

     When the complainant could not identify a discrete episode, the
post-ingestion interval was calculated. The majority of the complainants
reporting insomnia, mood alteration, or fatigue who could provide this
information stated that their symptoms were gone within 6 days of
ceasing to use products containing aspartame. One complainant in each of
these categories reported still being symptomatic at the time of
interview, even after stopping use of  products containing aspartame.

Medical History

     About one-third (36 percent) of the cases reported no medical
problems for which they sought care in the past 2 years. The most
frequent medical problems reported were allergies to foods, drugs, or
other substances.

Hypertension (8) and diabetes (7) were the most frequently reported
problems. Six neurological/behavioral illnesses were reported, including
two reports of previous seizure-type activity, one report of migraine
headaches, one report of anxiety disorder, and one report of chronic
schizophrenia.

Medications

     Forty of the cases reported taking no medications in the past 2
years. Of the medications reported, the most frequently cited were
antihypertensives (10). Fourteen other reported medications could be
broadly considered as having neurological or behavioral effects. These
medications included tranquilizers (4), analgesics/narcotics (4), anti
depressives (2), sedatives (1), and anti psychotics (1). Physician
Contacts

     In three-quarters of the cases no physician was consulted about the
symptoms reported. Of the 25 percent who were seen by a physician, one
physician (case V-0002*) stated conclusively that he felt that the
aspartame caused the symptomatology. Several other physicians felt that
aspartame was possibly associated with the symptoms, but were not
willing to make this diagnosis based on their evaluation of the symptom
episode(s) (see case reports T-0346, V-0090, and M-0328*).

NEUROLOGICAL/BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS: TABLES

Table 6-1
Age, Race, and Sex Distribution of Cases With Primary
Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms By Screening Classification

               All Cases*
               Selected for Review     Group D** Excluded
               Percent     Number     Percent     Number

Age (Years)
<20               10          13          11          10
21-30             21          27          20          18
31-40             29          37          30          27
41-50             13          17          12          11
51-60             14          18          15          14
61+               11          14           9           8
Unknown            2           3           3           3

TOTAL           100          129         100          91

Race
White            98          126          97          88
All other         2            2           2           2
Unknown           1            1           1           1

TOTAL           101          129         100          91


Sex
Male             28          36           32          28
Female           72          93           69          63

TOTAL           100         129          101          91

*Excludes 2 cases with miscellaneous symptoms.

**Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated
that the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

Table 6-2
Distribution of Cases Selected for Review With Primary
Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms* By Screening Classification**

               Percent      Number

Group A          15          19
Group B          12          15
Group C          44          57
Group D          29          38

TOTAL           100         129

*Excludes 2 cases with miscellaneous symptoms.
**Screening Classifications:

Group A: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with more than one aspartame-
containing product.

Group B: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with same aspartame-
containing product.

Group C: Symptoms occurred associated with aspartmae-containing product,
but there was no re challenge.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated
that the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

     (For complete definitions, see pages 17-18.)

Table 6-3
Distribution of Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms By Sub category, Group
D Excluded*

Symptoms                 Percent     Number

Headache                   22          41
Mood Alterations           21          39
Insomnia                   11          20
Dizziness                  10          19
Fatigue                    10          18
Visual Impairment           4           8
Numbness                    3           6
Hyperactivity               3           5
Seizures                    3           5
Disorientation              2           4
Lack of Concentration       2           3
Ringing in Ears             2           3
Memory Loss                 2           3
Drowsiness/listlessness     1           2
Fainting                    1           1
"Hallucinations"            1           1
Loss of Balance             1           1
Motor Dysfunction           1           1
Sleepwalking                1           1
Speech Impairment           1           1
"Rush to Forehead"          1           1
"Paranoia"                  1           1
Nightmares                  1           1

TOTAL SYMPTOMS            105         185
TOTAL COMPLAINANTS        100          91

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated
that the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

Table 6-4

Time From First Regular Use Of Implicated Aspartame-Containing
Product(s) To Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms (Symptom-Free Interval)
By Reported Symptoms Group D* Excluded

Time               Headache          Dizziness         Hyperactivity
                  %     No.          %     No.         %     No.

< 1 day          41     17          42     8          60     3
2-6 days         17      7           5     1           0     0
7-30 days        10      4          11     2          20     1

1-2 months        7      3           5     1           0     0
> 2 months       12      5           5     1           0     0
Unknown          12      5           5     1          20     1

TOTAL            99     41         100    19         100     5

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

Table 6-5
Time From First Regular Use of Implicated Aspartame-Containing Product(s)
To Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms
(Symptom-Free Interval)
By Reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

                  Insomnia     Mood Alterations     **     Fatigue
Time              %     No     %     No.               %     No.

<1 day           15     3     18     7                6     1
2-6 days         10     2     15     6               22     4
7-30 days        20     4     13     5               11     2
1-2 months       15     3     18     7               33     6
>2 months        20     4     13     5                6     1

Unknown          20     4     13     5                6     1

TOTAL           100     20   100    39             100     18

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

**Includes anxiety, irritation, agitation, and depression

Table 6-6
Latency Interval for Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms Associated with
Discrete Ingestion of Aspartame-Containing Products By Reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

                    Headache      Dizziness      Hyperactivity
Time                %     No.     %      No.     %     No.
<4 min.             5     2      11      2       0     0
5-30 min.          10     4       5      1       0     0
31-60 min.         15     6      16      3      40     2
2-3 hours          10     4      16      3      20     1
4-6 hours          10     4       0      0      20     1
7-24 hours          7     3       0      0       0     0
1-2 days            7     3       0      0       0     0
Unknown/NA**       37    15      53     10      20     1

TOTAL             101     41    101     19     100     5

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

**Includes cases for which a discrete ingestion could not be identified.

Table 6-7
Duration of Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms Associated with Discrete
Ingestion of Aspartame-Containing Products By Reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

                        Headache     Dizziness     Hypertension
Time                    %     No.    %     No.     %     No.

<4 min.                 0     0      0     0       0     0
5-30 min.               2     1      5     1       0     0
31-60 min.              2     1     11     2       0     0
2-3 hours              12     5      5     1      21     1
4-6 hours              10     4     16     3       0     0
7-12 hours             12     5      0     0      20     1

13-24 hours             2     1      0     0      20     1
1-2 days                7     3      0     0       0     0
3-7 days                5     2     11     2       0     0
Unknown/NA**           46     19    53     10     40     2

TOTAL                 101     41   102     19    100     5

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

**Includes cases for which a discrete ingestion could not be identified.

Table 6-8

Time From Last Ingestion of Implicated Aspartame-Containing Product(s) To
Cessation of Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms By Reported symptoms
Group D* Excluded

                        Insomnia      Mood Alterations**     Fatigue
Time                    %     No.     %      No.             %     No.
<1 day                  5     1       13      5              6     1
2-3 days               25     5       36     14             44     8
3-6 days               15     3       10      4              6     1
7-30 days              20     4        8      3              6     1
Still Symptomatic       5     1        3      1              6     1
UnKnown/NA***          30     6       31     12             33     6

TOTAL                 100    20      101     39            101    18

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. (For complete
definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18)

** Includes anxiety, irritation, agitation, and depression

***Includes cases in which this variable was not calculated because a
discrete ingestion could be identified.

NEUROLOGICAL/BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS: CASE REPORTS

     The following case reports represent a sample of the
neurological/behavioral complaints that we chose after the re interviews to
illustrate a variety of points about the neurological/behavioral reports.

In addition to some Group A case reports, others are presented because the
case histories were cogent, they dealt with severe symptomatology, or they
served to illustrate the difficulties inherent in evaluating this type of
data.

     Several of the case reports describe some of the more common symptoms
associated with aspartame by the Group A complainants. In this group,
headaches were the most frequent, with 11 of the 18 Group A complainants
reporting this symptom. Insomnia was the next most frequently reported
symptom and was reported by five of these complainants. Mood alterations
were reported by four. Case reports are included that illustrate each of
these complaints. (See case reports V-0412 and V-0455; see also S-0125 and
S-0148 in the section on allergic complaints in this report, and case
reports V-0476 and V-0477 in the section on gastrointestinal complaints.)

     Several of the case reports presented here come from Group B. These
reports were classified in Group B because the complainant re challenged
themselves with only aspartame-containing products, but since several clear
and consistent histories emerged from Group B, some of these reports were

also included (see case reports V-0042, V-0051, V-0093, and V-0404).

One report illustrates a unique case history of a child with hyperactivity
(case V-0002). This case is of note because the symptoms were apparently
confirmed in clinical studies by an objective observer. According to verbal
communication with the child's pediatrician, double-blind,
observer-validated clinical trials were performed on this child. The
results of these trials are pending publication and are not yet available
for review. However, it has been reported verbally by one attending
physician that the study confirmed the reports of hyperactivity associated
with the child's ingestion of aspartame. (Additional case reports of
hyperactivity are those numbered V-0030 and S-0565.)

     Other case reports illustrate findings from the re interviews obtained
subsequent to the initial preliminary computer analysis, (e.g., reports of
a dose-response effect: cases V-0042 and V-0404). Several others illustrate
in greater depth the character of the symptomatology, such as the case
reports describing the complainants' headaches as similar to headaches
resulting from monosodium glutamate (MSG) ingestion (case reports V-0093
and V-0404).

     Several case reports describe fairly severe symptomatology such as
extreme mood alterations (case reports M-0328, t-0346, and V-0415). Several
of these reports are of note because of the complex case histories, and
illustrate the difficulty involved in attempting to assess the
relationship, if any of the symptoms to the ingestion of aspartame. For
example, several of the symptoms experienced by complainants are of such a
nature that they could not be assessed by an observer. In one case, a
complainant (V-0047--allergy case reports) reports "hallucinating." which
he describes as meaning "things not looking normal;" and in two other
cases, the complainants report felling "suicidal" (case reports M-0328 and
V-0415). Many of the symptoms occurred over long time spans and therefore
involve extensive recall problems. Also, several cases have unexplained
medical histories that are relevant to the complaint, such as whiplash
injury in a complainant reporting severe headaches (T-0346). The complexity
of these histories precludes any conclusive statements being made about
them, but they do serve to illustrate the very intricate nature of many of
the neurological/behavioral reports.

V-0002: Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 4-year-old white male had symptoms of insomnia, headache,
aggressive behavior, and disorientation. His mother reported that he
appeared "glassy eyed" and was "running around wildly... hitting his
head against the wall," and this his speech was rapid and slurred. The
symptoms first ... while he was consuming 2-3 glasses of Kool Aid or
Wyler's lemonade daily along with Halfsies cereal 3 time a week. His
symptoms topped approximately 24 hours after he stopped ingesting these
products. Since this time, the child has participated in double-blind,*
videotaped, observer-validated study. This study reportedly confirmed
that the symptoms occur following aspartame ingestion. the symptoms have
also consistently recurred on at least three occasions when the child
was "accidentally' given three different foods with aspartame--hot
chocolate, bubble gum, and cookies. The child's private pediatrician,
who feels that the child's symptoms are due to aspartame, reported that
he has observed the child's symptoms have become more prolonged with
increased exposure to aspartame.

     Relevant medical History: The child's mother reports that he is
allergic to milk protein, but that he has no other allergies.

* The report of double-blind trial is based on verbal communication with
the investigator. The results are being prepared for publication and are
not available for review at the time of this report.

V-0030: Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 7-year-old white male had symptoms of hyperactivity, irritability
and agitation, extreme excitability, and insomnia. the parents first
noticed symptoms in the child during a one-week period in which he was
consuming 1-2 packets per day of the table-top sweetener, Equal. During
this period, the child's first-grade teacher called and asked the parents
if he was on any dedication because she had noticed that he had become
inattentive, very talkative, and overactive. Intake of Equal was
discontinued, and 3 days later, his behavior had returned to normal at
school and at home. Seven months later, the symptoms of hyperactivity,
agitation, and excitability occurred with greater severity within 1 hour of
ingesting another aspartame product (about 1 pint of Kool Aid). The
symptoms lasted about 16 hours and were accompanied by insomnia. The child
was not referred to a physician about his symptoms.

     Relative Medical History: The child has had mild to moderate
sensorineural hearing loss since birth. He also has had a reaction somewhat
similar to the reported symptoms after taking on one occasion the
medication Dimetapp at 18 months of age.

V-0042: Neurological/Behavioral, Group B

     A 30-year-old white female reported symptoms of severe headache,
disorientation, and loss of depth perception. Her first symptom, which she
described as a severe headache, occurred within 45 minutes of her first
ingestion of an aspartame product (2 glasses of lemonade-flavored Crystal
Light), and lasted overnight. The next day, she ingested the same amount of
this product and again had a similar experience. The following day, she
drank several 14 ox. glasses of the product on an empty stomach. Two to 3
hours later, she became disoriented while driving her car and experienced
"loss of depth perception," which made it difficult to drive. She also
became confused about what street she was on. The disorientation and
headache lasted throughout the afternoon (about 3 hours). Several days
later she consumed the aspartame product again and had the same reaction.
She then recognized a connection between the drink and her symptoms and
stopped ingesting  the product.

Relevant Medical History: None.

V-0051: Neurological/Behavioral, Group B

     A 33-year-old white female reported symptoms of dizziness and
lightheadedness, which she described as being similar to symptoms she has
experienced after taking cold tablets. her first symptoms occurred 10-20
minutes after first using an aspartame product (1/2 packet of Equal) in her
coffee. The symptoms "came and went in waves at about 10-20 minute
intervals" for 2-5 hours. These symptoms recurred the next day with similar
latency and duration after again using the same amount of the aspartame
product. The complainant stopped consuming Equal and no longer had
symptoms. She did not see a physician about her symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant has not been under medical
care or used any medications except Contact in the past 2 years.

V-0090: Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 39-year-old white female complained of depression, memory loss,
lethargy, irritability, dizziness, and headaches. The complainant's first
use of aspartame-containing products was in March 1983, when she began
using approximately 8 packs on Equal per day. During the symptomatic
interval, the complainant added other aspartmae-containing products to he
diet, including Diet Coke and Kool Aid. The symptoms started in mid-April
and increased in number and intensity in subsequent months. the first
symptom to occur was lethargy. Over the ensuing months, irritability,
dizziness, depression, and memory loss occurred. She states that when she
stopped using aspartmae-containing products in mid-September following a
news report, the symptoms improved within 1 day and ceased within 1 week.
The complainant subsequently re challenged herself approximately 2 months
later with Equal, consuming 4 packets per day for approximately 3 days. She
stated that she became dizzy on the third day and that the episode was
"very frightening." After these symptoms appeared she stated that she
stopped consuming Equal, and approximately 24 hours later the symptoms
subsided.

     The complainant consulted three physicians during this time. Only her
family physician was available for interview, and she stated that he "had
no reason to doubt the judgment of the complainant."

     Relevant Medical History: The patient has a past history of thyroid
disease as well as a past history of migraine headaches for which she was
on Valium and Cafergot at the time of the symptoms. Thyroid screen at the
time of the symptoms was reported to be normal. The only other medical
condition reported was an allergy to ampicillin and compazine.

V-0093: Neurological/Behavioral, Group B

     A 39-year-old white female reported symptoms of nausea, headache and
dizziness. The headache and dizziness occurred 1 hour after her first
ingestion of an aspartame-sweetened Sprite and lasted 6 hours, while the
nausea occurred about and hour and a half after ingestion. These symptoms
recurred the next day after again drinking this product, though the time
frames reported for this second episode were somewhat shorter than for the
first. Ten to 15 minutes after ingesting the product, she experienced
dizziness. Forty minutes after ingestion, she experienced a headache and
nausea. All of of the symptoms lasted 12 hours. the complainant no longer
consumes aspartame products. She did not see a physician about her symptoms.

     Relevant medical History: The complainant has a history of migraine
headaches. She reported that her response to this aspartame product was
identical to symptoms she has had after eating foods that contain
monosodium glutamate.

M-0328: Neurological/Behavioral, Group C

     A 17-year-old white female reported symptoms of lethargy, depression,
severe mood swings, and suicidal tendencies. (The parents of the
complainant were interviewed because they did not wish their daughter to be
subjected to the stress of talking to the investigator.) They reported that
the symptoms began within 2 weeks of first regular use of a product
containing aspartmae. (At a different interview, the complainant's parents
reported that she used one-half packet of Equal per day for approximately 2
months prior to the first recorded symptoms.) The complainant's parents
also reported that, during the symptomatic period, the complainant consumed
eight 12-ounce cans of diet Coke per day, one-half packets of Equal per
day, two quarts of Crystal Light drink per day, and one quart of Crystal
Light iced tea per week.

     The parents described their daughter previous to the symptomatic
episode as "healthy, vibrant and positively motivated, with a genius IQ. in
excess of 170." they stated that she was a "straight-A" student who was
very athletic and always "diet conscious" and that artificially sweetened
drinks were the only "non-nutritious" foods that she ingested.

     The parents described the complainant during the symptomatic episode
as a "week, fragile, depressed person who has lost her sense of
independence and her spirit." They reported that the complainant was seen
by several physicians during her symptomatic episode for uncontrollable
mood swings, lethargy, and "plan to commit suicide." In February 1984, an
osteopathic physician diagnosed an impairment of liver and kidney function
of UnKnown etiology. The physician treated the complainant with megadoses
of vitamins B and C.

     The complainant stopped taking aspartame-containing products in
January of 1984. During a follow-up phone conversation, the complainant's
mother said that the complainant's condition had improved somewhat, but
that her kidney screen has become normal again, and that her
psychotherapist is considering placing her on anti depressive medication.
Although the complainant had not used aspartame for almost 9 months, her
physician said that aspartame was suspect because symptoms coincided with
ingestion of aspartame products and he could not determine any other
etiology for the liver and kidney impairment.

     Relevant medical History; past medical history is unremarkable with
the exception of an allergy to penicillin and a low-calorie diet at the
time of the symptoms.

T-0346: Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     The complainant is a 17-year-old white female whose chief complaints
were headache, nasal discharge, and mood alterations. The complainant began
consuming three packets of Equal every day in October 1982. The first
symptoms occurred within a week of the first use of aspartame-containing
products. She states that within 40 minutes of ingestion of the product,
she suffered from severe headaches. These headaches were described as being
so severe that they "made her mad".

     The complainants mother stated that the headaches became increasingly
disruptive and painful until the family, in December of 1982, finally had
the daughter committed after she threatened the family members with
violence. During her hospitalization, the complainant's mother stated the
complainant did not use any aspartame-containing products and did not
suffer from headaches. for the 6 months following her discharge the
complainant resumed her use of aspartame and suffered from "fairly mild"
headaches. In the summer of 1983, however, the complainant began consuming
approximately 6 cans per day of diet drinks and the headaches became
increasingly severe. In September of 1983, the patient had a very severe
headache and was evaluated in the emergency room where she had an EEG.
Results of the EEG were abnormal.

     In December of 1983, the complainant saw a news report on television
describing symptoms associated with aspartame use. The complainant stated
that as soon as she stopped consuming aspartame, the symptoms ceased. She
stated that there has been no recurrence of her symptoms since that time
with the exception of two episodes in which she "absent-mindedly" forgot
about her problems with aspartme and drank a can of diet soda. During both
these times, the headaches returned. The complainant's mother also
indicated that the complainant had another symptom-free interval around
October/November of 1983 when her daughter stopped ingesting Equal and diet
sodas.

     According to a verbal report by complainant's physician, it is
possible that the complainant has "allergic rhinitis" related to aspartame
use, but he stated that there is no way to test or prove this and that he
is not positive of the diagnosis. the mother also stated that she is unsure
whether her daughter's symptoms are due to aspartame or due to an
automobile accident that occurred in June of 1982 in which the patient
suffered a whiplash injury.

Relevant Medical History: Complainant reported whiplash injury, June 1982.

V-0404:  Neurological/Behavioral, Group B

     A 33 year old white male physician reported symptoms of a severe,
bitemporal vascular headache.  His first symptoms occurred about 15 minutes
after his first substantial ingestion (16 oz) of Carnation hot chocolate.

     His symptoms first occurred about 1 month after he began ingesting
aspartame products: diet soft drink (Pepsi Free), hot chocolate
(Carnation), and table-top sweetener (Equal); however, he reported that he
used these products very intermittently and in low quantities.

     On the occasion of his first substantial ingestion of Carnation hot
chocolate, the symptoms lasted 3 hours.  They recurred the next day when he
"experimented" by again drinking 16 oz. of the same product on an empty
stomach.  The latency and duration of symptoms was the same as the first
episode.  The complainant reported that his symptoms were dose-related in
that he experienced a severe headache with two cups of hot chocolate, a
headache of lesser intensity with one cup, and no symptoms with one-half
cup of Diet Pepsi.  The complainant, a staff psychiatrist, did not see a
physician about his symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History:  The complainant has had similar symptoms
after ingesting Chinese food containing monosodium glutamate.

V-0412:  Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 28 year old white male reported insomnia, which first occurred 4 to
8 hours after his first ingestion of the table-top sweetener, Equal.  The
insomnia lasted 8 hours.  For four consecutive nights after using Equal,
the insomnia recurred and was of the same latency for onset and duration as
the first night.  The complainant discontinued use of this product and his
normal sleep patterns "immediately" returned.  Five months later, the
insomnia recurred 4 hours after ingestion of another aspartame-containing
product (Diet Pepsi). The insomnia again lasted 8 hours. The complainant no
longer uses aspartame products and no longer has symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: Remarkable only for a history of high blood
pressure controlled with Catapres.

V-0415: Neurological/Behavioral, group C

     A 62-year-old white male reported symptoms of acute depression with
thoughts of suicide. These symptoms occurred approximately 10 days after
beginning daily ingestion of an aspartame product( table-top sweetener,
Equal). The symptoms continued up until approximately 3 days after he
discontinued use of this product. (Complainant was not sure of exact time
frames.) He has not consumed this product since and has not had recurrence
of symptoms. The complainant did not see a physician about his symptoms and
stated that he never experienced these symptoms prior to using this product.

     Relevant Medical History: None.

V-0455: neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 30-year-old white female reported symptoms of moodiness, insomnia,
craving for carbohydrates, and weight gain. the complainant was unsure when
her symptoms first occurred, but suspected they began the same season she
began using aspartame products. She had been consuming daily three such
products (Diet Coke, Diet 7-Up, and Kool-Aid --2-3 glasses/day) in the fall
and another aspartame product (Swiss Miss hot chocolate--2-3 cups/day)
during the winter. In March the complainant "experimented" by stopping and
restarting the use of aspartame-containing products. the symptoms of
moodiness, insomnia, and craving for carbohydrates recurred about a day
after restarting use and lasted for 2 to 3 days. After discontinuing use,
she no longer had these symptoms. The complainant did not see a physician
about her symptoms.

     Relevant medical history: At the time of symptoms, the complainant was
taking Synthroid.

S-0565: Neurological/Behavioral and Gastrointestinal, Group A

     The mother of a 7-year-old white male reported that her son had
abdominal pain, headache, fever, and hyperactivity, His first symptoms
occurred within 4 hours after consuming Diet Coke. The symptoms lasted for
12 hours.

Approximately 1 week later he was given Featherweight dessert mix and had
the same symptoms with the same latency and duration. Approximately 1 week
after this second incident he consumed Alba hot chocolate mix and
experienced a third, identical episode.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant is under treatment for food
allergies (sugar, spinach, fruits) and allergies to dust and molds. Allergy
shots were given every 8 weeks.

NEUROLOGICAL/BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS: DISCUSSION

     One of the most notable findings of this analysis was the number and
diversity of symptoms reported. In order to provide a framework for the
analysis, we described a wide range of the reported symptoms as
neurological/behavioral. Thus this category is a broad one including
symptoms as diverse as headaches, insomnia, mood alterations, cognitive and
motor disturbances, sensory alterations, and generalized fatigue and weakness.

     Because of the multiplicity of symptoms that were initially described,
it was necessary to break this category down into specific symptoms or
symptom categories (e.g., mood alterations) for the analysis. Following
this cataloguing of the neurological/behavioral symptoms, we attempted to
screen the wide range of reported symptoms in order to identify any that
might be related to aspartame ingestion. One screening mechanism we used to
accomplish this was to focus on the most frequently reported symptoms. This
procedure highlighted headaches (the most frequently reported single
symptom) and mood changes (the most frequently reported symptom category).
Dizziness, insomnia, and fatigue were the next most frequently reported
single symptoms, each being reported symptoms were initially considered to
have a somewhat greater likelihood of being related to aspartame ingestion
that those that were reported quite infrequently (such as loss of sense of
smell). Frequency of report, however, could be considered only a
preliminary screening mechanism; this criterion is probably influenced by
other factors, such as the prevalence of the symptom in the general
population, the perceived seriousness of the symptom, and the exposure of
complainant to media publicity.

     Consistency and plausibility of time-frame data was another criterion
used to asses the likelihood that neurological/behavioral symptoms might be
associated with aspartmae ingestion. Once again, however, this criterion
has important limitations. in general some of the more acute symptoms, such
as headaches and dizziness, might be more easily associated by the
complainant with a discrete episode of ingestion. Some of the other
symptoms, such as fatigue or mood changes, are more diffuse in nature and
do not lend themselves as readily to identification with a clear-cut time
frame. Thus, information necessary to calculate latency and duration was
generally unavailable for the more diffuse symptoms such as fatigue or mood
changes. In those cases that had the data, however, the time frame for
these symptoms was apparently longer that for the more acute symptoms. If
any of these more diffuse symptoms are in fact due to aspartame ingestion,
it is not possible to determine from this type of analysis whether we
observed longer time frames because symptoms such as fatigue or mood
changes require longer periods of ingestion before the symptoms become
manifest of because the time of onset is more difficult to identify.

     In light of the difficulties associated with the wide range and
diffuse nature of many of the neurological/behavioral complaints,
classification of cases into Groups A-D with the subsequent intensive
follow-up of the pertinent case reports became a particularly valuable tool
for identifying the reports potentially more likely to be due to ingestion
of aspartame-containing products. This procedure gave us several analytic
options that were not available through the initial computer analysis.

First, the case report format gave us the opportunity to explore variables
in depth that were not available in the initial data base. For example,
several of the complainants with headaches (V-0042, V-0404) reported a
dose-response effect such that lesser doses produced modified or negligible
symptoms compared to higher doses. Case V-0042 reported an additional
symptom (visual disorientation) after ingesting greater quantities on an
empty stomach. the case report format also permitted us to obtain
additional useful information through re interviews with some of the unique
or noteworthy cases. the child with hyperactivity who was involved in the
clinical trial (V-0002) is one such particularly interesting case.

Unfortunately, this case is the only one that received such intensive
scrutiny by objective observers. However, the reported findings in this
case are at least sufficient to suggest that further inquiry into
hyperactivity may be warranted. The case report format also allowed us to
define the nature of the symptoms in greater detail that was possible in
the numerically coded, computer analysis phase of the investigation. For
example, it is interesting that two of the complainants (V-0093 and V-0404)
spontaneously described their headaches as being similar to those that they
have following ingestion of MSG. Finally, review of these cases enabled us
to further refine the analytic categories used to categorize the reports.

     Due in part to the diverse nature of symptoms reported and the
self-selected population of complainants, we could not define a single well
delineated constellation of symptoms from the large number of individual
symptoms reported. Some of the individual symptoms reported were of note,
however, based on our screening criteria. Several of the symptoms, such as
hyperactivity and headaches, were of note, based on the cogency of the case
reports, Others, such as dizziness and insomnia, were of note based on the
relative frequency of reports and the consistent nature of the case
histories. Interesting as these conjectures are, however, these data are
based on reports from individual cases. it would require more definitive
methodologies than were available this preliminary surveillance system to
determine if the association between the reported symptoms and aspartame
use is, in fact, a casual one and, if so, what segment of the population of
aspartame users might experience symptoms.

COMPLAINTS SUBMITTED AS SEIZURES

Introduction

     Complaints containing reports of seizures were evaluated as a separate
group, because of their potential severity. The case reports are summarized

next, followed by an overall discussion of the complaints in this category.

CASE REPORTS: COMPLAINTS SUBMITTED AS SEIZURES

V-0092: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group C

     The complainant, a 37-year-old white male, had been using
aspartame-containing product for 6 months prior to the reported episode.

His last ingestion of an aspartame-containing product (Equal) was reported
to be 24 hours prior to the episode. He stated that he was riding a horse,
the horse bolted, and he lost consciousness and fell, striking his head. He
said that witnesses told him he had a seizure, although the attending
physician was not a witness to the seizure. He also stated that he was not
under care or hospitalized for any medical problems at the time of the
incident or within the past two years, he was on no medications at the time
of the incident, and he has no history of seizures.

     Call to complainant on August 7, 1984, revealed that he has not used
aspartame-containing products since his accident, and that he has had no
further symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History; No known medical problems.

V-0095 Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group C

     The complainant, a 39-year-old white male, started using a product
containing aspartame in June of 1982. On June 29, 1983, he reportedly had
his first seizure. This was followed by other seizures on October 28,
November 11, November 25, November 27, 1983 and January 11 and February 2
of 1984. This person reports drinking as average of 40 cups of coffee per
day and has sweetened most of them with Equal. This person saw a physician
on numerous occasions and was hospitalized for his conditions.

     Since his first seizure this person has been treated with Triavil,
Dilantin, Ludiomil, Tranxene, Elavil, Haldol, Valium, and Mellaril.  He was
diagnosed as having anxiety disorder with panic attacks.

     Relevant Medical History: There appears to be the possibility of
organic brain syndrome, and the complainant is currently under psychiatric
treatment.

V-0097: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group C

     The complainant, a 31-year-old white female, started using
aspartame-containing products in may of 1983. She reported that she began
sleepwalking in mid-July of that year. On July 28, 1983, she awoke to find
herself bruised and sore. According to her physician, the complainant had
an epileptic seizure for which he prescribed Dilantin. Another physician
was consulted who agreed with the seizure diagnosis but did not classify it
as :epileptic," stating that it may not have been "organic related."

     Complainant did not approve release of her medical records to the FDA
for review,. We re contacted her  on August 8, 1984, and learned that she
has not used aspartame since the time of her complaint, that she has had no
subsequent seizures, and that she is not on any seizure medication.

     Relevant Medical History: None.

M-0320: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group C

     The complainant, a 26-year-old white female, had been using
aspartame-containing products for approximately 3 months prior to the

reported seizure that occurred on January 12, 1984. Within 24 hours prior
to the incident, complainant had consumed Equal, Diet Coke, and
aspartame-sweetened Kool-Aid and fruit punch.

     The complainant was standing at the time of the symptoms, which
included a "tingly" feeling, tunnel vision, lightheadedness and seizure. A
CAT scan and an EEG performed after the episode were within normal limits.
The initial medical diagnosis was orthostatic hypotension associated with
inappropriate adrenergic affect and secondary seizure. Another physician
was consulted for a second opinion. He indicated that, since the tests were
normal, he could not rule out a connection between the use of aspartame and
the seizure-type episode, but that he was not familiar with the aspartame
issue.

     We contacted the complainant by telephone on August 7, 1984, and
learned that she has had no further episodes. She has avoided
aspartame-containing foods, her weight has been stable, she has not been on
any diet plan, and her health has been good.

     Relevant Medical History: This person was on a 1000-1200 calorie diet
and exercise plan and lost 24 pounds between October 4, 1983, and January
12, 1984.

M-0323: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group D

     The complainant, a two-year-old white female, was first given
aspartame-containing products--Equal on her breakfast cereal and sugar-free
Kool-Aid mix to drink--on January 7, 1983. The date of her first seizure
was January 30, 1983. She also had seizures on February 2, 1983, may 25,
1983, and August 8, 1983. The parents reported that not all aspartame
ingestion's have been associated with seizure activity.

     A pediatrician and a neurologist both stated that they did not
consider the four seizure episodes to be aspartame-related. Both physicians
were unsure of etiology, but each suggested that the convulsions were a
common variety of "febrile seizures." They prescribed Phenobarbital elixir.

     We contacted the father on August 7, 1984, and learned that she has
had no further seizures while on Phenobarbital, that she has had no further
exposure to aspartame, and that her health and her growth and development
are normal.

     Relevant Medical History: None.

M-0330: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group D

     The complainant, a two-year-old white male, was given an
aspartame-containing product on December 13, 1983, and 30 minutes after
ingestion, had a grand mal seizure. Similar incidents occurred on December
24, 1983, and January 4, 1984. The child was hospitalized December 13-14,
1983, and given Phenobarbital. His physician stated that the first seizure
appeared to be a febrile seizure, and the subsequent ones have been typical
of epilepsy.

     Relevant Medical History: None known.

T-0350: Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group A

     The complainant, a 37-year-old white female, first used an
aspartame-containing product in January of 1984. Within 24 hours she
experienced "an aura of familiarity, anxiety and nausea." During the week
of January 15-21, 1984, she drank four more Diet Cokes, and each time she
had the same experience. She did not see a physician for the reported
incidents.

     During a follow-up call, the complainant said that she has avoided
aspartame-containing products and has not had seizures, with the exception
of one time early in July when she inadvertently drank three-fourths of a
can of Diet 7-Up containing aspartame. Twenty-six hours after drinking the
7-Up, she had the same symptoms in mild form. She believes aspartame acts
as a trigger for her symptoms and that possibly other similar compounds
have acted as triggers in the past when she had similar symptoms unrelated
to aspartame.

     Relevant Medical History: She was diagnosed at age 19 as having
jacksonian seizures, but has had little medical follow-up since that time.
Complainant reports that she has averaged about two symptoms episodes,
which were similar in character, per year since age 19. She has been on no
medication for her condition.

V-0458: Neurological/Behavior (Seizure-Type Activity Group C

     The complainant is a 33-year -old white female who first used an
aspartmae containing product in June of 1983. approximately 3 months later,
on October 9, 1983, the complainant experienced a seizure. Four months
later, on February 9, 1984, she experienced another seizure, following
which she stopped using Equal. Her physicians diagnosis was idiopathic
epilepsy. De did not know is it was related to aspartame use. Prior to
this, complainant reported that she was not under a physician's care nor
hospitalized within the past 2 years.

     Since the reported episodes the complainant has not used
aspartame-containing products, has been in good health, and has remained
symptom-free.

     Relevant Medical History: None

S-0558 Neurological/Behavioral (Seizure-Type Activity) Group D

     The complainant, a 32-year-old female, reported that her first regular
use of an aspartame-containing product was in June of 1983, 6 months prior
to her first symptom episode. In the 24 hours before the reported incident,
she consumed 32 oz. of Kool Aid with aspartame and 24 oz. of Diet Coke. She
reported that her symptoms included headaches, neck pain, nausea,
dizziness, and a "movement disorder" of her right arm. The medical record
from her neurology consultation indicated a diagnosis of "mycious without
stereotypic pattern," which could have been associated with a functional
disorder as well as "true neurologic disease." The physician did not know
if the symptoms were related to aspartmae use. Complainant did not report
similar symptoms after consuming and aspartmae-containing product at any
other time.

     Relevant Medical History: At the time of the incident, complainant was
under treatment for hypertension with Minipress. She reported being on an
extremely low calorie diet and had lost 60 pounds in six months. At the
time of her episode, she had completed a 4-day feast followed by drinking
alcohol with her friends and taking Norgesic and Darvocet in addition to
Minipress. She was not able to be reached for follow-up information.

Discussion: Complaints Submitted as Seizures

     As can be seen from the preceding case reports, the nine seizure case
reports vary markedly with regard to history and presentation. Two of the
reports fell into group D because physicians attributed the seizure
activity to other etiologies (M-0323, M0330). Another was classified in
Group D (S-0558) because the complainant continued to use aspartame without
further seizure activity. One report met the criteria of Group A (T-0350),
but it is not clear from the history that the symptoms reported constituted
true seizure activity, (The symptoms described were "an aura of
familiarity, anxiety, and Nausea.") Also, this complainant did not seek
medical attention, so there is no verification of the diagnosis of seizures.

     The remainder of the case reports were classified as belonging to
Group C; the majority  of these cases reported chronic ingestion of
aspartame-containing products with intermittent seizure activity. Among
these cases, several histories contained information that suggests
plausible alternative etiologies for the seizures, as for example V-0092,
in which the complainant struck his head after falling from a horse, and
case M-0320 who had a "secondary seizure" following an episode of
orthostatic hypotension while on a low-calorie diet. In some other cases,
the complainants described their symptoms as seizures, but the medical
record provides other diagnosis; for example, case V-0095 was diagnosed as
suffering from "anxiety disorder with panic attacks"; case S-0558 was
diagnosed as having a "movement disorder," potentially functional in
nature. In two cases ( V-0458 and V-0097) there is not a clear alternative
explanation for the seizures. In the case of V-0458, a diagnosis of
idiopathic epilepsy was made after the complainant experienced two
seizures, the first after consuming aspartame far a 3-month period, and the
second 4 months after the first seizure. In this case, since the
complainant did not have a seizure until after 3 months of chronic
aspartame use, and no history of challenge-re challenge episodes are
available. It is difficult to relate these two seizures to the use of
aspartame. in the case of V-0097, the complainant refused to release her
medical records, but the history indicates that this complainant also had
been using aspartame for at least 2 months prior to the onset of symptoms.

     In summary, from the review of the first nine cases containing reports
of seizures we could not find convincing evidence that any of the
documented seizures had a high probability of being due to ingestion of
aspartame-containing products. It is unclear whether the one case that fell
into Group A is actually a case of seizure activity, as the history does
not fully support this impression and there was no medical diagnosis
available. The two cases is which there were no alternative diagnosis or
etiology also did not have very convincing time frames regarding to
aspartame use and seizure onset, although there may have been a dose effect
involved. Seizure activity commonly occurs without a documentable etiology,
and this compounds the difficulty of assessing case reports linking
aspartame use with seizures. Without benefit of more intensive medical
follow-up, we cannot rule out the possibility that aspartame may in some
cases act a a trigger for seizure activity, but there is not sufficient
evidence from these nine cases to raise our suspicions that this is a
likely possibility.

ALLERGIC SYMPTOMS: RESULTS

     We have included in this section all rashes and skin eruptions and
"sore" throat/mouth regardless of whether or not they were classically
allergic-type eruptions.

Demographic Characteristics of Cases

     The demographic characteristics of the 40 complainants reporting
allergic-type symptoms closely parallel the demographic characteristics of
all cases. About half (19) are white females, aged 31-60 years.
Ninety-three percent (37) of all cases with allergic symptoms are white 75
percent (30) are female (Table 7-1). The demographic characteristics of
Groups A-C are similar to those of the overall group of subjects with
allergic symptoms.

Classification of Cases

     Of the 40 cases with allergic symptoms, 18 percent (7) met the
criteria for Group A, 15 percent (60 for Group B, 25 percent (10) fro Group
C, and 43 percent (17) for Group D (Table 7-2). In the discussions that
follow Groups A-C are included.

Description of symptoms

     Of the 23 cases in Groups A-C, 30 percent (7)   had symptoms of rash
only; 26 percent (6) had rash plus other allergic symptoms such as itching,
swelling and respiratory distress 26 percent (6) had "sore" throat and/or
mouth only; and 17 percent (4) had other allergic symptoms (Table 7-3).

Cases with allergic symptoms other than rash had swelling, itching or both.

The "sore" throat and/or mouth category included symptoms of a burning
sensation, irritation, reddening, or formation of blisters inside the
throat or mouth.

Temporal Associations between Symptoms and Use of Aspartmae Products

     For the purpose of analyzing time intervals, complainants were divided
into the following groups: rash and/or itching, "sore" throat and/or mouth,
and other allergic symptoms.  Unlike other major categories where time
intervals were analyzed by complaint, the time intervals in the allergic
sections are analyzed by complainant. That is, each person was reviewed
with regard to the timing of the beginning of his/her symptoms.

     Symptom-free interval: Time from the first regular use of implicated
aspartmae-containing products to the first allergic symptom(s) (Table 7-4).

     The symptom-free interval for over half (12) of the 23 complainants
was less that 2 days. The symptom-free interval for 17 percent (4) of these
cases (40 was unknown. The range of symptom-free intervals for first
allergic symptoms were zero time (immediately) to 12 months. The
symptom-free ranges for rash and/or itching, "sore" throat and/or mouth,
and other allergic symptoms were 10 minutes to 12 months, immediately to 2
hours, and 1 to 3 days, respectively.

Latency of Onset: Time from most recent ingestion of implicated product to
symptoms (Table 7-5).

     The latency interval for 73 percent (17) of complainants was less than
13 hours with the latency interval of all but one of the remaining cases
being UnKnown or not applicable (Table 7-5). The range of latency intervals
for first allergic symptoms was "immediately" to 2 days. The latency ranges
for rash and/or itching, "sore" throat and/or mouth, and other allergic
symptoms were 10 minutes to 2 days, immediately to 12 hours, and 2 to 12
hours respectively.

Duration: Time over which the episode occurred after ingestion of
aspartame-containing products (Table 7-6).

     Duration of symptoms varied considerably (5 minutes to 1 month) among
the 11 cases in which symptom duration for rash and/or itching and "sore"
throat and/or mouth was 1 hour to 1 month and 5 minutes to 3 days,
respectively. Symptom duration for the 3 persons with other allergic
symptoms was UnKnown or not applicable.

     Among the 4 persons (all complaining of rash or itching) in which a
discrete ingestion could not be identified, the interval between last
ingestion aspartame product(s0 and cessation of first symptom(s) ranged
from 1 to 11 days.

Medical History

     About half (11) of these complainants reported a history of allergies;
over one-third (8), food allergies.

     One of the complainants had an illness that may be relevant to
occurrence of symptoms. For 15 years this person has had systemic lupus,
which is associated with allergic phenomena, and was taking, Chlorambucil,
and Premarin at the time of symptoms.

Medications

     Seventy-four percent (17) of these persons were taking medications at
the time of symptoms; twenty-two percent (5) were taking allergy medications.

Physician Visits

     Almost one third (7) of these persons saw a physician about their
symptoms. Of these, one physician thought that the symptoms were related to
aspartmae use; two physicians thought that the symptoms might be related to
aspartmae use.

Allergic Symptoms: Tables

Table 7-1

Age, Race, and Sex Distribution of Cases With Allergic Symptoms
By Screening Classification

All Cases
                  Selected for Review     Group D* Excluded
                  %      No.               %     No.
Age (years)
<20              10      4                13     3
21-30            15      6                13     3
31-40            23      9                30     7
41-50            25     10                22     5
51-60            13      5                0      0
61+              15      6               22      5
Refused/
UnKnown           0      0                0      0

TOTAL           101     40              100     23

Race
White            93     37              100     23
All Other         3      1                0      0
UnKnown           5      2                0      0
TOTAL           101     40              100     23

Sex
Male             25     10               26      6
Female           75     30               74     17
TOTAL           100     40              100     23

* Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Table 7-2

Distribution of Cases With Allergic Symptoms

By Screening Classification*
Cases Selected for Review

          Percent      Number
Group A     18           7
Group B     15           6
Group C     25          10
Group D     43          17
TOTAL      101          40

*Screening classifications:

Group A: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with more than one
aspartame-containing product.

Group B: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with same aspartame-containing
product.

Group C: Symptoms occurred associated with aspartame-containing product,
but there was no re challenge.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re-challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartmae.

(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18. ) Percent (%) may
not total 100 due to rounding.

Table 7-3
Distribution of Allergic Symptoms
By Sub category*
Group D# Excluded

Symptoms                         Percent     Number

Rash                              30          7
Rash and other
allergic symptoms                 26          6
"Sore" throat/mouth only          26          6
Other allergic symptoms           17          4

Total Complainants               99          23

*By symptom
# Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.
(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.) &Percent (%) may
not total due to rounding.

Table 7-4
Symptom-Free Interval
Time from First Regular Use of Implicated Aspartame-Containing Product(s)
To First Allergic Symptoms*
Group D& Excluded

Other Allergic Symptoms

                   Rash/Itching     "Sore" Throat/Mouth
Time               %      No.       %     No.     %     No.
< 1 day            47     7         80    4       33     1
2-3 days            0     0         0     0       33     1
4-7 days           11     2         0     0        0     0
8-30 days           7     1         0     0        0     0
1-2 months         13     2         0     0        0     0
> 2 months         13     2        20     1       33     1

TOTAL#             11    15        11     5       99     3

RANGE =           10 minutes     Immediate          1 day
                  to             to                 to
                  12 months      2 hours            3 days
* Figures represent the percent and number of complainants within each time
interval.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, See pages 17-18.) #Percent (%) may
not total 100 due to rounding

Table 7-5

Latency interval for First Allergic Symptoms Associated with a Discrete
Ingestion of Aspartame-Containing Products*
Group D Excluded

Other Allergic Symptoms

                       Rash/Itching     "Sore" Throat/Mouth
Time                    %      No.     %     No.     %     No.
< 1 hour                27     4       60     3      0     0
2-6 hours                7     1       20     1     33     1
7-12 hours              27     4       20     1     67     2
13-23 hours              0     0        0     0      0     0

1-2 days                 7     1        0     0      0     0
> 2 days                 0     0        0     0      0     0
Unknown/
not applicable          33     5        0     0      0     0

TOTAL                  101    15      100     5    100     3

                     10 minutes     Immediate         2 hours
     RANGE =         to             to                to
                     2 days         12 hours          12 hours

*Figures represent the percent and number of complainants within each time
interval.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.
(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, See pages 17-18.) #Percent (%) may
not total 100 due to rounding

Table 7-6

Duration of First Allergic Symptoms
Associated with a Discrete ingestion
of Aspartame-Containing Products*
Group D# Excluded

Other Allergic Symptoms

                        Rash/itching     "Sore" Throat/mouth
Time                    %     No.        %      No.     %     No.
<1 hour                 7     1          20     1       0     0
2-6 hours              13     2          0      0       0     0
7-12 hours              7     1         20      1       0     0
13-71 hours             7     1         20      1       0     0
3-7 days                0     0         20      1       0     0
>7 days                13     2          0      0       0     0

Unknown/
not applicable#        53     8         20      1     100     3

TOTAL                 100    15        100      5     100     3

*Figures represent the percent and number of complainants within each time
interval.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, See pages 17-18.) #Includes cases
for which a discrete ingestion could not be identified.

CASE REPORTS: ALLERGIC SYMPTOMS

     All of the cases in Group A were contacted for follow-up interviews.
Of these, one no longer felt that symptoms were due to aspartame and
withdrew her complaint, leaving Group A cases. In three cases there were
minor discrepancies in reporting of symptom time frames. A dose-response
relationship between aspartame product consumption and allergic-type
symptoms is a possibility with two cases. One complainant had symptoms when
she consumed large quantities of two aspartame products, but did not have
symptoms when she consumed small quantities of a third aspartame product
(case S-0125). Another complainant thought that her symptoms might have
been  associated with aspartmae product build-up over several days as well
as to the amount of product ingestion on any given day (case S0148).

     Of the seven Group a cases, three had allergic symptoms only. The
remaining four had various combinations of allergy plus either
neurological/behavior or gastrointestinal symptoms on the initial episode.

One complainant (V-0047) who initially reported burning and tingling in the
mouth with various neurological/behavior symptoms (feeling "strange",
"tense", "uneasy" etc.) experiencing only burning and tingling
subsequently. in one other case (S-0148), rash and headache occurred on
initial ingestion, and headache only on subsequent ingestion.

V-0047: Allergic and Neurological/Behavioral, Group A

     A 62-year -old white male reported symptoms of burning and tingling
inside the mouth and throat after ingestion of aspartame products on
several occasions. In addition, the complainant reported "possible
hallucinations" (described as things not looking right"); and felling
"strange, tense, and uneasy;" and that "something was wrong" after
ingestion of an aspartame-containing product. (Note: He did not report the
"hallucinations" on re interview.) His first symptoms occurred about 2
hours after his first and most recent ingestion of an aspartame product
(Kool Aid). The symptoms lasted 8 to 24 hours. (He reported 24 hours in a
first interview, and about 8 hours in follow-up interview.) Several months
later, similar mouth and throat symptoms occurred and have recurred on
occasion after ingesting Carnation Sugar Free Hot Cocoa Mix. In these
episodes, the latency for onset of symptoms was 30 minutes to 2 hours, and
the duration of symptoms was 1-2 hours. This complainant still consumes
small quantities of aspartame-containing products (e.g. 6-12 oz.. diet soft
drink) in occasion, at which time he may experience "very slight burning'
inside the mouth/ The complainant saw a physician about his symptoms. the
physician found the complainant normal except for slight hypertension.

     Relevant Medical History: None.

S-0125 Allergic and Neurological/Behavioral. Group A

     A 33-year-old white female reported symptoms of rash, itching
respiratory distress, insomnia and nightmares. Her first symptoms occurred
about 2 weeks after her first ingestion of aspartame-containing products
(Wyler's lemonade; and Kool Aid) and 2-12 hours after her most recent
ingestion of 1 or more of these products. (She reported 12 hours in the
first interview, 2 hours in a follow-up interview.) She continued to
consume large quantities of these products (a total of 1-2 quarts a day)
intermittently for about 2 weeks and observed and increased allergic
response with continued product use. During this time, her symptoms
recurred after ingesting each of these products on separate occasions;
however, she could not recall the number of episodes. Since this time, she
has on occasion consumed smaller quantities of diet soft drinks with
aspartame (1 12-oz. can in a day) and has not had symptoms. She did not see
a physician about her symptoms.

     Relevant medical History: The complainant is allergic to penicillin
and sulfa drugs. For 15 years she has had systemic lupus, which is
associated with allergic phenomena. She was taking Prednisone, Chlorambucil
and Premarin at the time of symptoms.

S-0148 Allergic and Neurological/Behavioral. Group A

     A 34-year-old white female reported symptoms of headaches, nausea and
rash. Her first symptoms occurred about 2-4 weeks after her first ingestion
of aspartmae products (Equal table top sweetener, Lipton iced tea, Alba
milk/water additive; '77 Fit 'm Frosty drink mix). During this time, she
may have consumed one to two servings of al  three products on a given day.

She estimated that the latency of onset of al l symptoms was about on-half
hour, but she was not sure. all three symptoms occurred simultaneously. The
headaches and nausea lasted about 3 hours. Two months later, headaches and
nausea symptoms recurred on two separate occasions after ingesting another
aspartame-containing product (diet soft drink). She had been consuming this
product for about 4 days prior to experiencing the two symptoms again. The
latency for onset of both symptoms and the duration of symptoms were
similar to the first episode. The complainants reported that since this
time she has consumed about once every 3 weeks over a 3-4 month period 8
oz. of an aspartmae product such as a soft drink, and she has not had
symptoms. The complainant thinks that her symptoms may be due to aspartame,
but the symptom occurrences may be associated with product "build-up" over
several days as well as to the amount of product ingestion on any given day.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant has numerous allergies to
foods and pollen. Headaches are a common symptom of these allergies; rash
is not.

The complainant reported she has experienced headaches and nausea after
using aspartmae products even after consciously trying to eliminate other
allergenic substances form her diet and environment.

S-0155: Allergic-Type Symptoms. Group A

     A 30-year-old female reported symptoms of a reddish rash with white
heads and itching on her face and chest. Her first symptoms occurred 7-8
hours after her first ingestion of an aspartame product( Crystal Light
powdered drink mix). the symptoms lasted 2-3 days.

     Similar but more pronounced symptoms occurred about 1 month later when
she drank Lipton ice tea with aspartame. The latency for symptom onset and
duration of symptoms for these episodes were similar to the first episode.
She did not see a physician about her symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant develops acne when she eats
dairy products or chocolate.

S-0179: Allergic-Type Symptoms. Group A

     A 45-year-old white female reported symptoms of swelling, redness, and
itching of the skin around the eyes. Her first symptoms occurred within 1
month (exact time unknown) of her first ingestion of an
aspartame-containing product (Equal). the symptoms  gradually  became worse
during the 6-8 weeks she used the product, but subsided when she stopped
using the product. Similar symptoms occurred on at least one re challenge
with a different aspartame-containing product (Diet Coke) several weeks or
months after the first long episode. The latency for symptom onset was
15-30 minutes, and the duration of symptoms was 2-3 hours. The complainant
now tries to avoid aspartame-containing products, but on occasion still
consumes them (about once a month), at which time her symptoms recur. She
did not see a physician about her symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant develops "watery eyes and
upper respiratory congestion" when she eats cheese, and she may also
experience symptoms after ingesting milk. She may have been taking an
antihistamine at the time of the first episode.

V-0461: Allergic-Type symptoms. Group A

     A 42-year-old white female reported symptoms of reddening of the mouth
with small blisters forming in the margin of the tongue. Her first symptoms
occurred within 1 month (exact time unknown) of the first ingesting
products containing aspartame( Carnation hot chocolate and Diet Coke) and
about 12 hours after her most recent ingestion of one of a combination of
these products. The symptoms lasted 3-4 days. these symptoms recurred on
four re challenges with aspartame products, at least one of these in which
different product (table-top sweetener) was consumed. The latency for
symptom onset and duration of symptoms for these subsequent episodes were
the same as for the first episode. She did not see a physician about her
symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: In the past, the complainant has had "canker
sores" in the mouth following an illness such as flu or a cold and also as
a teenager after she chewed bubble gum.

V-0595: Allergic and Gastrointestinal. Group A

     A 35-year-old white female reported symptoms of hives and nausea. her
first symptoms of hives and nausea occurred several minutes after her first
ingestion of an aspartame-containing product Diet Coke). Both symptoms
lasted 1-12 hours. (She reported 12 hours in a first interview 1 hour in a
follow-up interview.)  The same symptoms occurred the next day when she
consumed a different aspartame product (hot-chocolate--Swiss Miss Lite).
The latency for symptom onset and the duration of symptoms were similar to
the first episode. She did not see a physician.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant has a history of allergies
to food and drugs.

Other cases of Note (Groups B and C)

     One Group B case is a breast-feed infant who, on two occasions,
developed a rash that coincided with his mother's ingestion of
aspartame-containing products. She ingested Equal and Crystal Light drink
on one occasion; and one of these products, Equal, on another occasion.

Allergic Systems: Discussion

The allergic category included a range of symptoms that were thought most
likely to be allergic: itching, rash, "sore" throat/mouth. Since allergies
can be caused by almost any substance in sensitive individuals, it is
biologically plausible that either aspartame or one of its metabolites may
cause allergies. However, aspartame cannot be shown as a casual agent
without re challenge studies that control for other factors.

     Of the allergy symptom categories, the "sore" throat/mouth is the most
diverse and includes symptoms of burning sensation, irrigation, reddening,
or formation of blisters. More information would be needed to determine
whether or not the "sore" throat/mouth category represents a reaction to
aspartame and, if so, if it represents an allergic phenomenon.

GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS: RESULTS

Demographic Characteristics of complainants

     The demographic characteristics of the 51 complainants with
gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are similar to the characteristics of all
persons reporting symptoms. Approximately half (28) are white women, aged
31-60 years. Ninety-four  percent (48) of all GI cases are white; 77
percent (39) are female (Table 8-1). The demographic characteristics of
Groups A-C are similar to the overall group of individuals with GI symptoms.

Classification of Cases

     Of the 51 cases with GI symptoms, 14 percent (7) met the criteria for
Group A, 18 percent (9) for Group B, 37 percent (19) for Group C, and 31
percent (16) for Group D (Table 8-2). For the following sections, only
Groups A-C are discussed.
Description of Symptoms

     The most common GI symptoms are abdominal pain, 29 percent (16) ;
nausea, 27 percent (15); diarrhea, 20 percent (11), and vomiting, 14
percent (8) (Table 8-3). Nine percent (5) of cases exhibited other types of
GI disturbances (indigestion, gas, gastritis, green stools, rectal bleeding).
Time Frame Information

Symptom free Interval: Time from first ingestion of the implicated product
to first symptoms.

     Approximately 60 percent of all GI symptoms were experienced within 1
day after first consumption of the implicated aspartame-containing product
(Table 8-4). The symptom-free interval was unknown for several cases. The
range for the symptom-free interval was "immediate" to 11 months.

Latency of Onset: Time from most recent ingestion of the implicated product
to symptoms.

     The latency interval was less than or equal to 24 hours for all
symptoms with a known latency interval (Table 8-5). The latency interval
was unknown for three symptoms. The latency interval was within 1 hour of
ingestion for 43 percent of abdominal pain symptoms, 54 percent of nausea,
27 percent of diarrhea, and 49 percent of vomiting. The other GI symptoms
had a latency between 4.5 and 24 hours. The range for latency of symptoms
was from 0 minutes to 24 hours.

Duration: Time over which the symptoms episode occurred after discrete
ingestion of aspartame-containing products.

     For cases with a known duration, most symptoms lasted less that 12
hours: abdominal pain (55 percent), nausea (60 percent), diarrhea (54
percent), vomiting (89 percent) and other GI (40 percent) (Table 8-6). the
ranges for each of the symptom categories are: abdominal pain, 30 minutes
to 3 days; nausea, 1 hour to 2 days; diarrhea, 30 minutes to 13 hours;
vomiting, 3 minutes to 12 hours; and other GI symptoms, 2 hours to 30
hours. Ingestion of aspartame overlapped with symptom episode, and duration
could not be calculated for 6 of the 35 cases. In these cases, the time
from the last ingestion to last symptoms ranged from 1 day for abdominal
pain to 14 days for rectal bleeding with mucous discharge.

Medical History

     Of the 35 complainants, 8 reported on previous medical problems; 7
reported a previous GI problem; two reported a cholecystectomy within the
past year. The remaining five cases reported irritable bowel syndrome,
ulcer, hiatal hernia, "upset stomach" and "stomach ailment". Other
pertinent medical histories included arthritis (2) alcoholism (1),
hypertension (4), diabetes (4), lactose intolerance (1).
Medical History

     Of 35 complainants, 51 percent (18) reported that they were not on
medications at the time of symptoms. Two reported using medications for GI
problems, and the remaining reported taking a variety of other medications.

Physician Visits

     Eighteen percent (6) of complainants reported visiting a physician.
Out of the six cases, two physicians thought aspartame may be related to
the symptoms, two did not know whether or not the symptoms were related to
aspartame use, and two could not be contacted. )In one case the patient
would not sign a medical release form in the other case the physician could
not be located for the interview.)
Symptoms in Other Family Members

     Thirty-one percent (11) reported similar symptoms in other family
members after using aspartame-containing products. of these, two are
included as separate case reports (V-0476, V0477).  Two complainants
reported that other family members who did not use aspartame-containing
products had similar symptoms. (In one case, symptoms were attributed to
allergy to eggs and milk products; and in another case, to a medication
allergy).

GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS: TABLES

Table 8-1

Age, Race, and Sex Distribution of Cases With Gastrointestinal Symptoms
By Screening Classification
               All Cases
                    Selected For Review    Group D* Excluded
                    %      No.             %     No.
Age (years)
<20                 12      6              11     4
21-30               21     11              17     6
31-40               21     11              16     9
41-50               20     10              20     7
51-60               14      7              17     6
61+                 10      5               6     2
Refused/
Unknown              2      1               3     1

TOTAL              100     51             100    35

Race
White               94     48              91    32
All other            4      2               6     2
Unknown              2      1               3     1

TOTAL              100     51             100    35

Sex
Male                23     12              23     8
Female              77     39              77    27

TOTAL              100     51             100    35

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated the
symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. ( For complete definitions
of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Table 8-2

Distribution of Cases with Gastrointestinal Symptoms By Screening
Classification*

               Cases Selected for Review
                    Percent      Number

Group A               14           7
Group B               18           9
Group C               37          19
Group D               31          16

TOTAL                100          51

*Screening classifications:

Group A: Symptoms recurring on re challenge with more that on
aspartame-containing product.

Group B: Symptoms recurred on re challenge with same aspartame-containing
product.

Group C: Symptoms occurred associated with aspartame-containing product,
but there was no re challenge.

Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated that
the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.

(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Table 8-3

Distribution of Gastrointestinal Symptoms By Sub category*
Group D& Excluded

Symptoms               Percent Number

Abdominal Pain          29     16
Nausea                  27     15
Diarrhea               20      11
Vomiting               14       8
Other GI Symptoms       9       5

Total Symptoms          9       5
Total Complainant              35

*By symptom & Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician
stated the symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame.
(For complete definitions of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Percent (%) may not total 100 due to rounding.

Table 8-4

Symptom-free Interval
Time From First Regular Use Of Implicated Aspartame-Containing products To
Gastrointestinal Symptoms
By reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

       Abdominal Pain  Nausea     Diarrhea    Vomiting    Other GI
       %     NO.       %    No.   %     No.   %     No.   %     No.
Imm.   -     -         7    1     -     -     13    1      -     -
1 day  56    9        53    8    64     7     62    5     60     3
2-6     6    1         -    -     -     -      -    -      -     -
7-29   13    2         7    1     9     1     13    1     40     2
1-2 MO 13    2         -    -     -     -      -    -      -     -
2 mo.   6    1        13    2     9     1      -    -      -     -
UnKn    6    1        20    3    18     2     13    1      -     -

TOT   100   16       100   15   100    11    101    8    100     5

          1 day     Immediately  1 day     Immediately    1 day
RANGE     to         to          to        to             to
          3 months   11 months   6 months  8 days         14 days

* Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated the
symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. ( For complete definitions
of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Percent (%) may not total 100 due to rounding.

Table 8-5

Latency Interval for Gastrointestinal Symptoms Associated with Discrete
Ingestion of Aspartame Containing Products By Reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

          Abdominal Pain   Nausea     Diarrhea   Vomiting    Other GI Time
               %     No.   %    No.   %    No.   %     No.   %     No.

Immediately   12     2      7   1      -    -    13    1      -     -
4-30 min.      6     1     27   4      9    1    36    3      -     -
31-60 min     25     4     20   3     18    2     -    -      -     -
2-3 hours     12     2     27   4     18    2    25    2      -     -
4-6 hours     19     3     13   2     36    4    13    1     20     1
7-12 hours    12     2      7   1     18    2    13    1     20     1
13-24 hours    6     1      -   -      -    -     -    -     40     2
Unknown/
Not Applic.    6     1      -   -      -    -     -    -     40     2

TOTAL         98     16   101  15     99   11    98     8   100     5

            Immediate  10 min.   30 minutes  Immediately   4.5 hours
RANGE       to         to        to          to            to
            24 hours   10 hours  12 hours    12 hours      24 hours

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated the
symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. ( For complete definitions

of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Overnight = 12 hours
Includes cases where a discrete ingestion could not be identified.
Percent (%) may not total due to rounding.

Table 8-6

Duration of Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Associated with Discrete Ingestion of Aspartame-Containing Products By
Reported Symptoms
Group D* Excluded

           Abdominal Pain Nausea   Diarrhea  Vomiting  Other GI Time
           %    No.       %   No.  %   No.    %    No.  %     No.

Immediately -    -        -    -   -   -     13    1    -     -
5-30 min    6    1        -    -   9   1     13    1    -     -
31-60 min   6    1        7    1   9   1     -     -    -     -
2-3 hours  12    2       20    3   9   1     13    1   20     1
4-6 hours  12    2       13    2  18   2     25    2    -     -
7-12 hours 19    3       20    3   9   1     25    2   20     1
13-24 hours -    -        7    1   9   1     -     -    -     -
1-2 days   12    2       20    3   -   -     -     -   20     1
3-7 days    6    1        -    -   -   -     -     -    -     -
Unknown/NA 24    4       13    2  36   4     13    1   40     2

TOTAL      98   16      100   15  99  11     98    8  100     5

         30 minutes     1 hour      30 minutes     3 minutes    2 hours
Range    to             to          to             to           to
         3 days         2 days      13 hours       12 hours     30 hours

*Group D: Symptoms did not recur on re challenge, or physician stated the
symptoms were unlikely to be due to aspartame. ( For complete definitions
of Groups A-D, see pages 17-18.)

Includes cases where a discrete ingestion could not be identified Percent
(%) may not total 100 due to rounding

GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS: CASE REPORT

     For the following case reports, we re interviewed all complainants
classified in Group A. (One case was subsequently withdrawn because on re
interview the complainant attributed symptoms to a "flu".) Of the remaining
seven cases, one had gastrointestinal symptoms only, one had abdominal
cramps and water retention, four had both gastrointestinal and
neurological/behavioral symptoms, and one had both gastrointestinal and
allergic symptoms. There was a possibility of a dose response effect in one
case in which symptoms of abdominal cramps and water retention occurred,
but not at low doses.

S-0239: Gastrointestinal. Group A

     The complainant, a 34-year-old white female reported symptoms of
abdominal pain and gas. Her first symptoms occurred within 2 hours after
consuming Equal, her first use of a product containing aspartame. The
symptoms lasted approximately 8 hours. About 3 months after her first
episode, she re challenged herself once with Kool Aid and once with Crystal
Lite. On Each occasion she experienced the same symptoms with the same
latency and duration.

     Relevant medical History: Complainant has a history of colitis and
lactose intolerance.

V-0436: Gastrointestinal and Neurological/Behavioral. Group A

     The complainant, a 47-year-old male, reported symptoms of nausea,
dizziness, and drowsiness. His first symptoms occurred within 30 minutes
after consuming Tab, a diet cola not containing aspartame. The symptoms
lasted approximately 6 hours. One month later, all of the symptoms
recurred, this time less severely, when he drank Diet Coke. The latency for
those symptoms was the same. The duration for these symptoms was 8-10
hours. Approximately 6 months after this later episode, the complainant
reported a slight upset stomach after re challenge with Diet 7-Up. The
latency for this symptom was 30 minutes and its duration was approximately
1 hour.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant is diabetic, and he
regulates his diabetes by his diet. (The complainant is allergic to dust
and ragweed, but does not take any allegro medications.)

V-0476: Gastrointestinal and Neurologic/Behavioral. Group A

     The complainant a 27-year-old white female, reported symptoms of
cramps, diarrhea, vomiting, and headache. Her first symptoms occurred
within 4-5 hours after consuming Diet Coke, her first use of a product
containing aspartame. The symptoms lasted 5-6 hours. Two and on-half week
later, all of the symptoms except vomiting, recurred on re challenge with
Diet 7-Up.

(Vomiting was reported on re-interview, but not the initial interview.) The
latency for symptom onset was the same. The complainant was asymptomatic
within 3 days after her last ingestion of aspartame.

     Relevant medical History: The complainant has pollen allergies.

V-0477: Gastrointestinal and Neurologic/Behavioral. Group A

     The complainant, a 27-year-old male (husband of V-0476), reported
symptoms of cramps, diarrhea, vomiting and headache. The symptoms occurred
within 4-5 hours after consuming Diet Coke., his first use of a product
containing aspartame. The symptoms lasted approximately 6 hours. Two and
one-half weeks later, all of the symptoms except vomiting recurred on re
challenge with Diet 7-Up. (Vomiting was reported on -re-interview, but not
on initial interview.) The latency for symptoms onset was approximately 12
hours, and the symptoms lasted approximately 8 hours.

     Related Medical History; The complainant reported two kidney stone
episodes, one in December of 1977 and another in September 1978. At the
time of this report, the complainant was taking hydrochlorothiazide for his
kidneys

V-0497: Gastrointestinal Only. Group A

     The complainant, a 43-year-old white female, reported symptoms of
cramps and retention of body fluids with bloating. Her first symptoms
occurred within 12 hours after consuming Diet Coke and Equal. The symptoms
lasted for 2 days. Approximately 1 month later, the complainant re
challenged herself with Swiss Miss hot chocolate drink. The latency for
symptoms on set was the same. The duration of these symptoms was 3-5 days.
The complainant stated that these symptoms were related to the amount of
aspartame-containing product she ingested because, when she cut back on the
volume consumed, her symptoms disappeared.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant reported no medical problems
presently or within the past 2 years.

GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS: DISCUSSION

     No clear GI syndrome emerged from the data. Many of the complainants
reported a combination of GI symptoms with symptoms for other major
categories. Of the 51 cases reviewed with GI symptoms, 31 percent had a
history of recurring symptoms on re challenge with the same or different
aspartame-containing products. Several of the complainants had a previous
medical history of either GI or other illnesses that would predispose them
to GI symptoms. Some even suggested that some of these reported symptoms
may have represented either a coincidental exacerbation of a preexisting
condition or an increased sensitivity on their parts. In addition, several
of the complainants reported GI symptoms in other family members who did
not consume aspartame-containing products, which suggested the likelihood
of other causes of the symptoms.

     The difficulty in interpreting the present reported account is
illustrated by the re interview findings for Group A case reports. One
complainant withdrew her complaint after continuing to use products
containing aspartame and no longer having symptoms. A second complainant
(V-0436)  had repeated GI symptoms ( nausea, upset stomach) on ingestion of
Diet 7-Up and Diet Coke, which both contain aspartame; however, the same
complainant reported the most severe symptoms (nausea, dizziness, and
drowsiness) on first ingestion of Tab, a diet cola that did not contain
aspartame at the tie he drank it. Although this complainant reported
repeated symptoms on re challenge with more than one  aspartame-containing
product, the similar symptoms he reported on consuming Tab clearly suggest
the possibility of either a placebo effect (the complainant thought that
Tab had contained aspartame) or the possibility that some common factor in
cold diet drinks may precipitate GI symptoms in this person.

MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS: RESULTS

Demographic Characteristics of Cases

     All of the 10 women who reported menstrual symptoms were white and
ranged from 20 to 43. Half (five) were in their twenties, three in their
thirties , and two in their forties.  The ages of two of these cases who
were classified in Group D were 27 and 47.

Classification of Cases

     Of the 10 women with menstrual symptoms, none met the criteria for
Group A; 2 met the criteria for Group B; and 6 met the criteria for group
C. Two women who reported missed menses were classified into Group D. In
one case, her physicians did not think her symptoms were related to
aspartame. The other had been regularly ingesting large quantities of an
aspartame product for some months prior to onset of symptoms. In this case
the complainant recalled use of  the product prior to aspartame's release
on the market.

Her symptoms began within a couple of months of having had surgery and the
initiation of chemo- and radiation therapy for breast cancer. Because her
symptoms appeared to the physicians reviewing this report to be caused by
her cancer and the therapy, her case was categorized in Group D. (She
refused to sign a medical release to have her physicians contacted.) In the
discussions below, only Groups B and C are included.

Description of Symptoms

     The menstrual irregularities reported by the eight women in Groups B
and C included early (three) and late (two) menses, increased (two) and
decreased (two) menstrual flow, clotting (one), spotting between menses
(one) , and absence of menses (one).

Neurological/behavioral  symptoms accompanied menstrual irregularities in
75 percent (6) of these women. these symptoms included irritability
(three), headache (two), insomnia (two), fatigue (one), memory loss (one),
visual disturbances (one), dizziness (one) and disorientation (one). Other
symptoms accompanying menstrual irregularities included urgency to urinate
(one) and thirst (one).

Temporal Associations between Symptoms and Aspartame Products

Symptom-free interval: Time from first regular use of aspartame product(s)
to menstrual symptom(s).

     The date of first menstrual symptoms was calculated as actual or
expected date of menstrual period. The symptom-free interval for the 8
complainants ranged from 1-2 days to 7 months, with 6 of the 7 women having
symptom-free intervals of less than or equal to 2 months. (One of the seven
women indicated use during that "season".) One woman had a symptom-free
interval of up to 7 months. This complainant consumed large quantities of
an aspartame product during this interval (14 packs of Equal per day).

Latency and Duration of Symptoms: These time assessments are not
applicable, since all complainants continuously rather than discretely
ingested aspartame-containing products.

Post Ingestion Symptomatic Interval: Time from the last ingestion of
aspartame-containing products to cessation of menstrual symptom(s).

     The post-ingestion symptomatic interval for the 8 complainants ranged
from 2-3 days to 2-3 months, with all but 1 having post-symptom intervals
of less that or equal to 1 month.  The remaining woman reported that her
menses gradually returned to normal 2-3 months after discontinuation of
aspartame-containing products.

     All of the five who completely stopped  using products containing
aspartame reported no recurrence of symptoms. The 3 other woman have had,
on 1 or more occasions, not more than 1 12-oz. can of diet soft drink in a
day and have not had recurrence of symptoms.

Medical History and Medications Related to Menses

Medical History: Seven of the eight complainants reported that they had not
had similar menstrual symptoms before the reported episode(s). The
remaining complainant reported similar symptoms about 6 years earlier.

     Two of the eight women were on weight-reduction diets at the time of
symptoms. One was on a 1000 kcal/day diet for 2-3 months; the other was on
a 500 kcal/day diet for 2 weeks. All seven complainants for which weight
and height were reported were within acceptable weight ranges at the time
of symptoms (1973 Weight Tables, HEW Conference on Obesity).

Medications: Two of the eight complainants were on birth control pills at
the time of symptoms. They reportedly take these pills with regularity. One
complainant took progesterone around the time of menstrual symptoms in an
attempt to relieve neurological/behavioral symptoms that she thought might
be related to premenstrual syndrome. Another women reported that she
sometimes takes the pain reliever, Motrin for cramps at the start of her
menses. She may have been on this medication at the time of symptoms.

Physician Contacts

     Only one of the eight women saw a physician about her menstrual symptoms.

It is not known whether the physician for this woman thought her symptoms
were related to aspartame use, because the physician was unable to be
interviewed.

MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS: CASE REPORTS

All eight women in Groups B and C were contacted for follow-up interviews.

Reports follow for seven: two women in Group B, one women for which a dose
effect is reported, and four in which neurological/behavioral symptoms
accompanied menstrual symptoms.

T-0345: Menstrual. Group C

     A 31-year-old white female reported symptoms of early (1 week) and
late (1 week) menses. Her symptoms first occurred about 1 month after
starting her heaviest continuous use of aspartame-containing products (diet
soft drinks--Diet Coke, Diet Pepsi, Sugar Free Sprite) and about 7-8 months
after starting to use other aspartame products (Kool Aid). She consumed 1-2
glasses of Kool Aid per day for the first 3 months and then decreased
consumption to 1-2 glasses a month for several months. About 1 month before
her symptoms started, she began consuming about 4 12-oz. cans of diet soft
drink per day, continuing for 4 months. During this time, her menses came
early on 2 consecutive months and late on the 3rd month. Her normal
menstrual cycle resumed the month after she stopped continuous aspartame
product intake and has been normal since. (The complainant reports that she
has consumed an occasional diet soft drink since that time without symptoms).

Relevant Medical History: The complainant reported no history of menstrual
irregularities of the nature.

M-0357: Menstrual and Neurological/Behavioral. Group C

     A 23-year-old white female reported symptoms of absent menses and
decreased menstrual flow, headache, fatigue, dizziness, and "feeling bad".

Her menstrual and neurological symptoms first occurred about 1 month and 2
weeks, respectively, after first ingesting Diet Rite Coke containing
aspartame. She consumed a total of 2-3 12-oz. cans per day of 3 diet sodas
containing aspartame (Diet Rite Cola, Diet Coke, Diet Pepsi) for about 4
months. Her symptoms of fatigue was fairly constant. Dizziness would
sometimes occur about 1/2 hour after drinking a can of soda. Headaches
occurred about every 2-3 days. These neurological symptoms stopped about 1
week after she stopped using aspartame products. Menstrual irregularities
occurred for 4 months, stopped about 1 month after she discontinued
aspartame ingestion. The complainant reports that since this time she has
not consumed aspartame-containing products and has not had these symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this nature. At the time of symptoms, she had
been taking birth control pills regularly for several months.

V-0403 Menstrual and neurological/Behavioral. Group C

     A 20-year-old whit female reported symptoms of late menses (1 1/2
weeks), and insomnia. Her insomnia occurred about 5 days after her first
ingestion of Kool Aid containing Aspartame. Her menstrual period, expected

1-2 days after starting the aspartame ingestion, arrived 1 1/2 weeks late.
She drank 1-3 glasses of Kool Aid per day for 1-2 weeks. The insomnia
continued nightly until 2-3 days after she stopped drinking Kool Aid
intake; the menses arrived about 2-3 days after she stopped drinking Kool
Aid. Since she stopped continuous intake of aspartame-containing products,
she has not had symptoms.  she recalls consuming an aspartame product (1/4
can of diet soda) on only on occasion since this time.

     Relevant Medical History: the complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this magnitude. Prior to this episode, she said
she had at most a 2-3 day variance in onset of menses, and that this has
since resumed. The complainant reported no history of insomnia and so
recurrence of insomnia symptoms since the episode.

V-0420: Menstrual. Group B

     A 2-year-old white female reported having symptoms of urgency to
urinate and of headache within a few minutes of ingesting an
aspartame-containing products, and of early menses (3-5 days). Her symptoms
of urgency to urinate and headache* first occurred about 1 month after
first ingesting aspartame-containing diet soft drinks--Diet Coke, Diet
Pepsi, and Diet 7-Up. Her symptoms of early menses occurred about 2 months
following her first ingestion of aspartame products. The complainant
consumed these products ( a total of three 12-oz. cans per day) for about 2
months, with intermittent occurrence ("off and on") of headaches for 1
month and daily occurrence of urinary symptoms. She stopped using
aspartame-containing products for 1 month and did not have any of the 3
symptoms. The following month she resumed consumption of these products for
a few week and again had menstrual and urinary symptoms. She stopped using
aspartame products the next 2 months and reported no symptoms during these
months. the following month, the complainant consumed 3 12-oz. cans of Diet
7-Up per day for 2 weeks. The menstrual and urinary symptoms recurred
during this time, but stopped after she stopped ingestion of these
products. She no longer ingests aspartame.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this nature and no history of urinary tract
infection.

The complainant often takes Motrin for cramping at the start of her menses.

*The complainant did not report headache on initial interview; therefore
this case report is not included in the neurological/behavioral section.

V-0482: Menstrual. Group B

     A 32-year-old white female reported symptoms of increased menstrual
flow with large blood clots. Her first symptoms occurred about 20 days
after first ingesting aspartame-containing product (Equal and Kool Aid).
She ingested these products on a daily basis for 4 consecutive months (8
packets of Equal a day for the first 2 months, decreasing to 2-4 packets
per day for the remaining 2 months; 2-3 glasses of Kool-Aid per day for all
4 months). During each of these months, she experienced symptoms. She
stopped ingesting aspartame-containing products for about 2 1/2 months, and
her menses during this time were normal. She then resumed consumption of 2

packets of Equal per day for about 1 1/2 weeks and noticed the same
symptoms when her menses arrived about 5 days after starting ingestion. The
complainant no longer consumes aspartame products and has not had symptoms
since.

     Relevant Medical History: The complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this nature. The complainant was on a weight
reduction diet for 2-3 months, starting at the time of first ingestion of
aspartame-containing products, and reported losing 18 lbs. during this period.

V-0495: Menstrual and Neurological/Behavioral. Group C

     A 43-year-old white female reported symptoms of decreased menstrual
flow of short duration (1 day vs. 4 days), mood changes (e.g., "I would
flare up with anger about little things, whereas I am usually laid-back"),
and loss of recent memory (e.g., she would forget she called someone a few
minutes before and would call the person again). Her symptoms of menstrual
irregularities and mood changes first occurred during the same season
(exact time unknown) that she began ingestion three aspartame products
(Equal, Kool Aid, and Diet Coke). The symptoms came on gradually. Her
symptoms of recent memory loss first occurred about 4 months after first
ingesting these aspartame-containing products and about 1 month after
starting to ingest daily a fourth aspartmae-containing product (Swiss Miss
hot chocolate). She consumed 1 or more of these daily for about 7 months.
Her neurological/behavioral symptoms occurred almost daily until she
stopped ingesting aspartame-containing products, at which time the symptoms
gradually faded over a period of a few weeks. Her menstrual symptoms also
continued until she stopped aspartame product ingestion, at which time her
menses gradually returned to normal over a period of 2-3 months. Since
stopping daily ingestion of aspartame products, she has drunk--on about six
separate occasions--no more than one can on diet soft drink, and she has
not had symptoms.

     Relevant medical History: The complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this nature.

V-0498: Menstrual and Neurological/Behavioral. Group C

     A 26-year-old white female reported symptoms of increased menstrual
flow of early (q week) onset, insomnia, irritability, and loss of
concentration.

Her symptoms first occurred about 1 1/2 months after first ingesting
aspartame-containing products (diet soft drinks--Diet Coke and Diet Rite
Cola; powdered drink mixes--Wylers Sugar Free Drink, Kool Aid; and dessert
mix--D-Zerta). She consumed 2-4 12-oz. cans of diet soft drink per day for
2-3 months in addition to the dessert mix about once a week and powered
drinks about once every 2 weeks. The neurological/behavioral symptoms
continued until about 1 week after discontinuing aspartame product use; the
menstrual symptoms continued until about 1 month after discontinuing use.

Since this time, the complainant has not consumed aspartame-containing
products and has not had these symptoms.

     Relevant Medical History: the complainant reported no history of
menstrual irregularities of this nature. She has taken birth control pills

regularly for about 9 years.

MENSTRUAL SYNDROMES: DISCUSSION

     Although menstrual symptoms were reported by relatively few
complainants among the first cases received at CDC, (5 percent of 199
complainants), this category is applicable only to a subset of total
complainants (i.e. pre-menopausal women). Of the 10 cases with menstrual
complaints reviewed here, two of these women were classified into Group D.
The third consumed large quantities of aspartame products daily for 5 to 7
months before onset of symptoms and was on a low-calorie weight reduction
diet at the time of symptoms. For the remaining seven complainants, the
type of menstrual symptoms reported varied considerably, including
alterations in expected timing of menses to alterations in expected
quantity of menstrual flow.

     Time frame information is difficult to assess for menstrual
abnormalities because of the inherent temporal natural of the menstrual
cycle, but it was established that five of the seven complainants had been
consuming one or more aspartame products daily over a period of months
before the time symptoms first occurred. Also, recurrence of symptoms was
reported to be associated with continuous (daily) ingestion of aspartame
product(s) in two cases, but symptoms were not reported to recur in the
case of three women who "re challenged" with one or more discrete
ingestion's of small amounts of aspartame product(s).

     Cases containing reports of menstrual symptoms were screened for
alternative explanations for their symptoms, such as low body weight at
time of symptoms, improper use of birth control pills, use of other
hormonal medication, history of similar menstrual irregularities, etc.
Although alternative explanations for the majority of the menstrual
complaints were not established, it was not uncommon for women to
experience alterations in menstrual patterns from the cycle to cycle
without an obvious medical explanation. Additionally, without the benefit
of medical examination, a number of alternative explanations for the
menstrual complaints might be missed entirely.

     The evaluation of menstrual symptoms compared to the other major
symptom categories might be expected to be particularly difficult because
of a number of factors. The diffuse nature of these symptoms bring to mind
spurious associations or, alternatively, might cause any potentially real
associations to be overlooked. Menstrual abnormalities frequently are
accompanied by little or no pain, discomfort, or inconvenience in contrast
to the other symptom categories and therefore might not draw the women's
attention. Finally, many women experience variations in their menstrual
cycles without being outside the norm. In the absence of a clear,
consistent pattern of report of menstrual disturbance(s),  it is not
possible to evaluate whether the menstrual cases reviewed here are due to
normal menstrual variability, menstrual irregularities due to other causes,
or menstrual symptoms in fact associated causally with aspartame ingestion.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

     In summary, the quality and type of evidence obtained by a passive
surveillance system based on consumer complaints are or are not possible
under these circumstances to provide a basic descriptive analysis of the
demographic characteristics of the complainants revealed that the great
majority were white woman 20-60 years of age. This over representation of
women may reflect a greater use of aspartame-containing products, a greater
tendency to report their symptoms, or a greater susceptibility to side
effects from aspartame. Available data are not adequate to resolve this issue.

     A wide variety of symptoms was reported. No specific constellation of
symptoms was identified in relation to aspartame ingestion; however, a
substantial number (25-30 percent) of individual complainants reported that
their symptoms recurred after repeated consumption of aspartame-containing
products without evidence of misuse or other alternative explanation. How
many of the individuals who reported repeated episodes of symptoms after
aspartmae use had symptoms that were due to aspartame, we cannot determine.
Whether the symptoms experienced by persons who chose not to use aspartame
again were caused be aspartame is also not clear. In a few instances
persons who had challenged themselves several times with
aspartmae-containing products found by the time of our re interview that
their symptoms were, in fact, not due to aspartmae. These individuals had
used aspartame without such symptoms subsequently or had come to
alternative explanations for their symptoms. This, this investigation of
consumer complaints of symptoms experienced after consumption of
aspartame-containing products has identified no specific individual
symptoms were reported with greater frequency that other symptoms, and 28
percent of individual complainants reported experiencing repeated episodes
of symptoms after aspartame use. While some of these reports are
undoubtedly due to mere coincidental occurrences of symptoms after
aspartmae consumption, and others may be due to the suggestibility of some
persons, still others may be attributed to some as yet undefined
sensibility to aspartame in commonly consumed amounts. The only way that
these possibilities could be thoroughly evaluated would be through focused
clinical studies.

APPENDIX

CASES REVIEWED FOR DEMOGRAPHIC AND SYMPTOM-SPECIFIC INFORMATION ONLY

Introduction

     The first 231 completed questionnaires received at CDC were coded for
intensive computer analysis. The following results are based on the
remaining 286 questionnaires, which were coded for demographic and
symptom-specific data only, for the purpose of assessing comparability with
the first 231.

     Consumer complaints originally submitted to the FDA and to G.D. Searle
and Company made up the bulk of the cases examined in this report (Appendix
Table 5). The FDA received 110 reports; G. D. Searle and Company received
92 reports. Dr. Woodrow C. Monte, Director, Food Science and Nutrition
Laboratory, Arizona State University, Temple, Arizona, provided 50 consumer
complaints that had been originally submitted to him. Also included in this
group were 31 additional complaints that had been submitted to the State of
Arizona. The remaining three reports came from Mr. James C. Turner,
Counselor, Community Nutrition institute, Washington, DC.

Summary of Results and Discussion

     Overall, the demographic distribution of these cases was similar to
the first 231 cases reviewed at CDC. Once again, the complainants were
predominantly female (76 percent) (Appendix Table 1) and white (97 percent)
(Appendix Table 20, with the majority being between the ages of 21 and 60
years (Appendix Table 3).

     The distribution of complainant's States of residence did, however,
differ from the initial analysis. Reports were again reviewed from many
different States; in this case, 23 percent were received from Arizona.
Forty-six percent of these 67 Arizona cases were included n reports that
the FDA solicited from Dr. Monte.* The increased number of complaints
received from residents of Arizona is most likely attributable to the
publicity in Arizona surrounding the concerns raised there by Dr. Monte. It
is also likely that many of the other complainants residing in Arizona were
aware of Dr. Monte's concerns and were thus encouraged to submit complaints
to the FDA, G.D. Searle and Company, or to the Arizona State Health
Department.

     For both the initial 231 cases and the subsequent 286, there were
relatively few cases reported until the summer of 1983 (Appendix Table 6).

In the analysis of the first 231 cases, there were fewer reports during the
fall of 1983 and then another peak of reports in the winter of 1983-84. In
the analysis of the subsequent 286 cases, reporting did not decrease during
the fall of 1983, but continued through the winter of 1983-84. This
apparent difference in reporting rates in the fall of 1983 is most likely
due to the instructions that the field investigators received to
concentrate initially on the most recent reports in order to maximize
recall by the complainants. According to these instructions, the complaints
received in the winter of 1983-84 would have been re interviewed prior to
those in the fall, thus giving the appearance of a lowered reporting during
the fall of 1983.

     The distribution of symptoms reported between the first 231 cases and
the remaining 286 cases was similar (Appendix Table 7). The most frequently
reported symptoms were in the neurological/behavioral and GI categories. In
the neurological/behavioral category, headaches and mood alterations were
again the most frequently reported symptoms (Appendix Table 8). In the
analysis of the 286 cases, mood alterations were more frequently reported
that headaches; but the difference is not large, and mood alterations is a
category that includes a number of different symptoms, while headaches is a
single symptom.

     The GI allergic symptom categories were reported with similar
frequency in the later analysis, and the distribution of symptoms reported
was also similar to the first 231 (Appendix Table 9 and 10). Slightly more
GI complaints also were accompanied by neurological/behavioral complaints;
however, as discussed in the preceding paragraph, the
neurological/behavioral complaints did not appear to differ significantly
from the initial 231.

     One death involving a worker in a G. D. Searle and Company plant was
reported to be among the 286 cases. |The clinical history has been reviewed
by the FDA, and it was not felt that there was any indication that this
death was associated with aspartame ingestion. Details were available in
the case report V-0656 included in this Appendix on page 145.

     Then, a small number of symptoms was reported in the analysis of the
286 cases that were not reported in the earlier analysis; the frequency of
such reports, however, was very low (Appendix Table 12). No previously
unrecognized category of complaint emerged in the later analysis in
sufficient numbers to warrant concern that the initial analysis had not
picked up a neurological/behavioral symptom complex present in the total
population of complainants. Overall, the demographic characteristics and
distribution of symptoms in the 286 cases analyzed in this section of the
report were very similar to the initial 231 cases that were analyzed in
depth. The comparative review did not indicate any bases for concern that
the initial 231 cases were likely to be unrepresentative of the overall
group of reported symptoms.

CASES REVIEWED FOR DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION: TABLES

Appendix Table 1

Sex Distribution of Remaining Cases

Compared with Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review

          Remaining Cases      Cases Selected for Review Sex
               Percent           Percent
Male              24               25
Female            76               75

TOTAL            100              100

Appendix Table 2

Race Distribution of Remaining Cases
Compared with Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth review

          Remaining Cases          Cases Selected for Review Race
               Percent               Percent
White             97                 94
All Other          2                  3
Unknown            1                  3

TOTAL            100                100

Appendix Table 3
Age Distribution of Remaining Cases
Compared with Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review

          Remaining Cases     Cases Selected for Review Age
               Percent           Percent
<20               22               18
31-40             26               26
41-50             17               20
51-60             17               13
61 +               9               11
Unknown            0                2

TOTAL            101               99

Appendix Table 4
Distribution of Remaining Cases
Compared with Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review By State of Residence
          Remaining Cases  Cases Selected for Review State
          Percent          Percent

AK          <1               0
AL          <1               1
AZ          23               2
CA          14               11
CO          2                2
CT          4                2
DC          <1               <1
DE          <1               0
FL          3                3
GA          1               <1
IL          3                5
IN          1                3
KS          0                1
KY          0                1
LA          1                0
MA          5                3
MD          4                4
ME          <1               0
MI          2                6
MN          1                1
MO          <1               0
MS          0                3
NC          2                3
NE          <1               <1
NH          0                1
NJ          1                5
NV          <1               0
NY          6               15
OH          4                5
OK          1                1
OR          1                0
PA          4                6
RI          <1               <1
SD          <1               0
TX          4                3
VA          1                3
VT          <1               0
WA          3               <1
WI          <1               3
WV          <1               <1
WY          1                0

Appendix Table 5

Distribution of Remaining Cases
Compared with initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review By
Agency/individual Receiving Report

                    Remaining Cases     Cases Selected for Review
Agency/Individual          Percent         Percent

FDA                         39               54
G.D. Searle and Company     32               39
Woodrow C. Monte            17                6
Arizona Health Dept.        11                0
James C. Turner              1                1

TOTAL                      100              100

Appendix Table 6

Distribution of Remaining Cases by Date of Symptom Onset Compared with
Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review

          Remaining Cases        Cases Selected for Review
               Percent           Percent

1982
June               1                0
July/August        2                3
Sept/Oct           2                1
Nov/Dec            1                3

1983
Jan/Feb            6                6
Mar/Apr            5                6
May/Jun           10                9
Jul/Aug           15               23
Sep/Oct           16               15
Nov/Dec           16               10

1984
Jan/Feb           18               16
Mar/Apr            3                3

Unknown*          4                 4

TOTAL            99                99

*Includes seven complaints in which the complainants was unsure of data of
onset; estimated dates indicate time when aspartame was not generally
available.

Percent (%) may not total 100 due to rounding.

Appendix Table 7

Distribution of Remaining Cases
Compared with Initial Cases Selected for In-Depth Review By Major Categories

                    Remaining Cases     Cases Selected for review Symptoms
Category                    Percent     Percent

Neurological/Behavioral       54          51
Neurological/Behavioral
     + Gastrointestinal       14           8
Neurological/Behavioral
     + Allergic                5           4
Neurological/Behavioral
     + Menstrual               5           3
Gastrointestinal Only         11          16
Gastrointestinal
     + Allergic                1          <1
Allergic Only                  7          16
Menstrual Only                 2           3
Neurological/Behavioral
     + Gastrointestinal

     + Allergic                1           0
Neurological/Behavioral
     + Gastrointestinal
     + Menstrual               1           0

TOTAL                        101         101

Excludes 32 cases reviewed for demographic data only.
Excludes 15 cases with complaints in non-major categories only.
Percent (%) may not total 100 due to rounding.

Appendix Table 8

Distribution of Remaining Cases
By Neurological/Behavioral Symptoms

Symptoms                      Percent        Number

Mood Alterations                  24          104
Headache                          20           88
Dizziness                         15           63
Insomnia                           7           31
Fatigue                            7           30
Visual Impairment                  6           26
Memory Loss                        4           16
Seizures/Pre-Seizures              3           12
Numbness                           2            9
Fainting                           2            9
Disorientation                     2            9
Hallucinations/Pre-hallucinations  1            6
Lack of Concentration              1            6
Hyperactivity                      1            5
Motor Dysfunction                  1            5
Auditory Disturbances              1            3
Ringing In Ears                   <1            2
Loss of Balance                   <1            1
Sleepwalking                      <1            1
Speech Impairment                 <1            1
Rush to Forehead                  <1            1
Paranoia                          <1            1
Nightmares                        <1            1
Behavioral Changes                <1            1
Personality Change                <1            1
Loss of Sense of Taste            <1            1
Drowsiness/Listlessness            0            0

TOTAL NEUROLOGICAL/BEHAVIORAL SYMPTOMS        433

Mood Alterations:
Agitation
Anxiety
Depression
Hysteria
Irritation
Nervousness
"Spaced-out"
Suicidal
Violent

For comparison with neurological/behavioral cases selected for in-depth
review. see Table 6-3, page 40.

Appendix Table 9

Distribution of Remaining Cases
By Gastrointestinal Symptoms

Symptoms                    Percent     Number

Nausea                       35          38
Diarrhea                     22          24
Abdominal Pain               19          21
Other GI Symptoms*           11          12

TOTAL GI SYMPTOMS          100          109

*Other GI Symptoms:

Symptom                              Number

Bloated feeling                       4
Gas                                   3
Activated preexisting colitis         1
Hiatial hernia                        1
Pancreatitis                          1
Burning in GI tract                   1
Soreness in rectal area               1
Indigestion                           1
Constipation                          1

Total, Other GI                      14

For comparison with gastrointestinal cases selected for in-depth review,
see Table 8-3, page 103.

Appendix Table 10

Distribution of Remaining Cases*
By Allergic Symptoms

Symtoms                         Percent     Number

Sore Throat/Mouth                 29          13
Rash                              24          11
Itching                           16           7
Anaphylactic Reaction              2           1
Other Allergic Symptoms           29          13

TOTAL ALLERGIC SYMPTOMS          100          45

Other Allergic Symptoms

Symptom                                    Number

Flushing                                     2
Swelling in toes                             1
Choking and gasping for air                  1
Constricted throat                           1
Welts on bottom of feet                      1
Welts on entire body                         1
Shallow breathing                            1
Pain in eyeballs                             1
Sinus pain between nose and right eye        1
Facial swelling                              1
Burning sensation in upper right arm         1
Burning in esophagus                         1
Total, Other Allergic                       13

For comparison with allergic cases selected for in-depth review, see Table
7-3, page 84.

Appendix Table 11

Distribution of Remaining Cases
By Menstrual Symptoms

Symptoms                         Percent     Number
Irregular Menses                  37          11
Increased Menstrual Flow          13           4
Decreased Menstrual Flow          13           4
Menstrual Spotting                 0           0
Premature Menses                   7           2
Late Menses                        7           2
Other Menstrual Sys               23           7

TOTAL                            100          30

Other Menstrual Symptoms
Symptom                              Number
Painful menstrual periods              3

Spotting between periods               2
Vaginal bleeding                       1
Continuous bleeding                    1

Total                                  7

Appendix Table 12

Distribution of Remaining Cases
By Miscellaneous Symptoms

Symptoms                           Number
Painful Joints                      11
Flu-like symptoms                    8
Palpitations/racing heart            3
Chills/sweats                        5
Sleepiness                           4
Bladder Dysfunction                  3
Fever                                3
Shortness of breath                  3
Loss of breath                       3
Coughing                             3
Pressure in chest                    2
Pressure in head                     2
Increased appetite                   2
Premature ventricular contractions   2
Pain in chest                        2
Rise in blood glucose level          2
Loss of appetite                     2
Strong odor in urine                 2
Blood in urine                       2
Urinary urge on awakening            1
Frequent urination                   1
Extreme thirst                       1
Swelling of ankles                   1
Swelling in both hands               1
Rigid and stiff                      1
Blackouts                            1
Heart pain                           1
Cramps on left side of body          1
Loss of strength                     1
Numerous colds & infections          1
Back pain                            1
Non-malignant tumor                  1
Drop in blood pressure               1
Sensitivity to light                 1
Hair growing on face (female)        1
Teeth crumbling                      1
Unusual taste in mouth               1
Insulin shock                        1
Charley horses                       1
Cardiac arrest                       1
Gray/black bar in left eye           1
Chipping of fingernails              1
Bitter taste                         1
Earache                              1
Lump in hip area                     1
Rapid breathing                      1
Left eye pain                        1

CASE REPORT: CASES REVIEWED FOR DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ONLY

V-0656:  Acute Myocardial Failure, Group D

     This is a complicated case of a 21-year-old white male worker in an
aspartmae production facility who died of acute myocardial failure. It was
reported by his stepfather and interviews were conducted with the mother,
wife, stepfather, and physicians of the deceased, as well as with the
medical examiner who performed the postmortem examination.

     The case subject was an apparently healthy heavy smoker and
occasionally heavy user of alcoholic beverages who developed in August 1981
severe right-sided chest pain for which he was hospitalized. No definite
diagnosis was made; however, it appeared from an EKG taken at the time that
he had some preexisting heart disease with a contraction defect (junctional
PVC, LVH by voltage criteria, bradycardia, and relatively increased QT and
decreased PR intervals.) Subsequently, he began working with aspartame in
large amounts and consumed aspartame-containing products. He intermittently
had chest pains, dizziness, blurred vision, and hot flashes; in October of
1982, he collapsed at home with cardiac arrest associated with ventricular
fibrillation. He developed a transient anoxic encephalopathy and was found
to have a dilated cardiomyopathy with chronic ventricular ectopic activity
and an anomalous origin of the left circumflex artery. He was followed
medically and maintained on quinidine sulfate. IN May of 1983, he was
involved in an industry accident, which resulted in the loss of his left
arm. He was reported to then have developed intermittent chest pains,
memory loss, and the onset of migraine headaches and muscular-skeletal
pains. He died in March 1984 while sleeping. Post-mortem examination
diagnosed myocardial hypertrophy and dilation, congenital anomaly of the
left interior descending artery, and a myocardiopathy possibly related to
viral endocarditis. Evidence that exposure to aspartmae caused or
aggravated his symptoms or his heart disease could not be established by
interview with physicians in attendance, with the medical examiner, or from
review of case records.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Kramer MS, Leventhal JM, Hutchinson TA, Feinstein AR. An algorithm  for
the operational assessment of adverse drug reactions. I. Background,
description, and instructions for use. JAMA 1979;242:623-632.

2. Hutchinsob TA, Leventhal JM, Kramer MS, Karch FE, Lipman AG, Feinstein
AR. An algorithm for the operational assessment of adverse drug reactions.
II. Demonstration of reproducibility and validity. JAMA 1979;242:633-638.

3. Visek WJ, Chronic ingestion of aspartame in humans in humans. In;
Aspartmae: physiology and biochemistry, Stegink LD and Filer LJ, eds. New
York and Boston: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1984.

4. Searle Research and Development. Long-term tolerance of aspartmae by
normal adults: a pre-marketing, clinical trials study conducted by Gunther
M. Frey, M.D., of Hill Top Research, Inc., Miamiville, Ohio. In Toxicology,
Volume 3 of 4, Aspartmae use as a sweetener in carbonated beverages. FAP
2A3661

--------------------------------------------------------

  (A special "Thank you" to David and Sherri Price for typing up this huge
report.)

-----

After reading this "full" report you can decide for yourself if
the summary was adequate, correct, or a whitewash.  Keep in mind that some
of the studies that approved aspartame were the target of an indictment for
fraud never carried out because two U.S. prosecutors went to work for the
law firm defending the case, which let slip the hounds of disease and death
on an unwarned public.  On 60-Minutes (Dec. 29, 1996) Dr. Ralph Walton
admitted that 83 of 90 INDEPENDENT studies on aspartame showed problems.
The 60-Minute spokesman chided the aspartame representitives that 70 of 70
Searle funded tests seemed to show aspartame to be OK (however, it seems
that Searle submitted around 112 documents and two of those studies were
submitted to the Department of Justice for an indictment for fraud). Of
Searle's many reports the FDA selected fifteen they termed as "pivotal"
to their decision to approve aspartame as safe.

   However, Dr. Moser (the Nutrasweet spokesman) admitted to Jennifer Cohen
(http:/www.dorway.com/jcohen.html) that:

"..the study should never have been undertaken, much less submitted as
legitimate observation.  This particular (RAO) experiment represents an
unpardonable breach in methodology."

If this motivates the reader to action...

http://www.dorway.com/congress.html is a good starting point for locating
someone in authority to complain to.

The President
DHHS
FDA
and your congressional representatives.
